remote sensing  
Article
Reconstruction and E cient Visualization of
Heterogeneous 3D City Models
Mehmet Buyukdemircioglu
 and Sultan Kocaman *
Department of Geomatics Engineering, Hacettepe University, Ankara 06800, Turkey;
mbuyukdemircioglu@hacettepe.edu.tr
*Correspondence: sultankocaman@hacettepe.edu.tr
Received: 20 May 2020; Accepted: 1 July 2020; Published: 2 July 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: The increasing e orts in developing smart city concepts are often coupled with
three-dimensional (3D) modeling of envisioned designs. Such conceptual designs and planning are
multi-disciplinary in their nature. Realistic implementations must include existing urban structures
for proper planning. The development of a participatory planning and presentation platform has
several challenges from scene reconstruction to high-performance visualization, while keeping the
ﬁdelity of the designs. This study proposes a framework for the integrated representation of existing
urban structures in CityGML LoD2 combined with a future city model in LoD3. The study area
is located in Sahinbey Municipality, Gaziantep, Turkey. Existing city parts and the terrain were
reconstructed using high-resolution aerial images, and the future city was designed in a CAD
(computer-aided design) environment with a high level of detail. The models were integrated through
a high-resolution digital terrain model. Various 3D modeling approaches together with model textures
and semantic data were implemented and compared. A number of performance tuning methods for
ecient representation and visualization were also investigated. The study shows that, although the
object diversity and the level of detail in the city models increase, automatic reconstruction, dynamic
updating, and high-performance web-based visualization of the models remain challenging.
Keywords: 3D urban scene modeling; photogrammetric reconstruction; digital terrain models;
data fusion; visualization; e cient representation; texturing; CesiumJS; virtual reality
1. Introduction
The World Urbanization Prospects describe the future of population in urban areas, whereby
more than half of the world population is living in cities [ 1]. The urban sprawl (i.e., 30% of the world’s
population in 1950 vs. 55% in 2018) brought several challenges to life in cities, such as poor accessibility
due to insu cient transportation infrastructure, poor air quality, inequality, safety, and slums, which
are unplanned settlements, as described by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 11
(Sustainable Cities and Communities) [ 2]. The e orts in tackling the problems that cause the reduction
in life quality are increasingly discussed under the smart city concept, which provides alternative
solutions to the traditional urban planning approaches using new technologies [ 3–5]. On the other
hand, the smart cities are seen as technology-driven entities, while they also need to ensure the
inclusion of citizens and the political, social, economic, and knowledge stakeholder groups in solving
problems [5].
The three-dimensional (3D) GIS (geographical information system) with 3D models of urban
structures (e.g., buildings, city furniture, plans, vegetation, infrastructure, etc.) provides the
technological basis for the design and development of smart cities, which require site-speciﬁc design.
Urban simulation and visualization are useful for a variety of applications, such as regional planning,
transportation, land-use regulations, and environmental protection [ 6]. The digital transformation
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128; doi:10.3390 /rs12132128 www.mdpi.com /journal /remotesensing | 1
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 2 of 26
of 3D spatial data and their standardized data models bring advantages in digital space and makes
the decision-making process more illustrative, easier to understand, and more comprehensible [ 7].
The e orts toward the realization of 3D GIS involve accurate and detailed 3D modeling of objects with
semantic attributes and high-performance visualization. Models coming from various sources can
be integrated using widely accepted exchange formats, such as City Geography Markup Language
(CityGML) and City JavaScript Object Notation (CityJSON). CityJSON [ 8] is an e cient alternative
to CityGML avoiding the use of GML, which can be tricky for implementation. The latest version
of CityGML (i.e., 3.0) [ 9] is expected to introduce various additional features for the management of
multiple versions and time-dependent properties. The exchange formats allow generating the models
with semantic data.
A 3D city model represents buildings and other man-made and natural objects in an urban
area, together with semantic information and a digital terrain model (DTM), which also reﬂects the
relations between them [ 10]. The 3D city models usually consist of a DTM and buildings, as well as
street-space and green-space models [ 11]. Although other city objects such as trees, streets, tunnels,
etc. may increase the sense of realism, they are usually represented in a 3D model when they have
a speciﬁc role in the desired application or analysis, especially for visualization. The quality of 3D
city models is determined by geometric, topological, and semantic accuracy [ 12]. On the other hand,
they require more storage space in comparison to two-dimensional (2D) data [ 13], and integration of
data from various sources is required to create model geometries with texture and semantic information.
The semantic and topological information added to the polygonal components of buildings, such as
year of reconstruction, energy consumption, walls of a building, etc., can be stored in a database and
linked with the building object.
The 3D city models are also crucial for planning in a virtual environment for the management
of cities, for performing di erent planning simulations, risk and disaster scenarios, etc. The third
dimension eliminates the disadvantages of 2D when considering multi-level structures [ 14]. The 3D
geometry allows the users to have a more natural interaction with the geo-spatial data [ 15]. Association
of geographical and semantic data in 3D city scenes makes them easily understandable for stakeholders,
decision-makers, citizens, and machines. The e orts carried out by both public and private organizations
in generating 3D city models are increasing, and many impressive and realistic 3D city models are
regularly o ered at scientiﬁc, professional, and commercial events (e.g., References [7,16–18]).
A smart city concept development project was initiated by the Ministry of Environment and
Urbanization (MoEU), Turkey, in 2018 [ 15] with the aim of designing a future city district having
green, human-centric, smart, and safe qualities, along with a sense of place, by reﬂecting the local
expectations in an unconstructed area. For this purpose, an area of 287 hectares was declared as a
project site in ¸ Sahinbey District of Gaziantep City, Turkey, by the MoEU. As a part of the project, a 3D
GIS environment was established by modeling the neighboring settlement areas of the project site using
aerial photogrammetric datasets and combining them with the design elements created in di erent
CAD (computer-aided design) environments by urban planners, landscape architects, environmental
and computer scientists, and geological engineers.
In this study, the model reconstruction and the visualization methodology of the integrated city
model is presented and analyzed. The main aim of the study was to investigate di erent modeling and
visualization options for the city model obtained from multiple sources (i.e., photogrammetric datasets
and CAD elements), to assess their performance and to report various issues encountered during the
implementation of the 3D GIS environment. Examples of such e orts in integrating existing models
with user-generated model content are increasing in the recent literature (e.g., References [ 19,20]). Here,
the future city contains a high level of detail (LoD) deﬁned according to the CityGML standard [ 21], LoD3,
whereas the existing districts were reconstructed as textured LoD2 models using photogrammetric
techniques. The integrated model was ﬁrstly stored in CityGML format, and it was visualized
together with a true orthophoto basemap and a high-resolution DTM. Open-source CesiumJS virtual
globe and Unity game engine with virtual reality (VR) support were implemented as visualization | 2
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 3 of 26
platforms and evaluated for di erent aspects. The generated models were stored in CityGML format
to ensure interoperability between di erent applications and semantic data integration. For e cient
and high-performance visualization, various optimization methods were applied to the generated
models. Additional web-based functions such as measurement tools, as well as querying and styling
of the generated model, were analyzed in detail. In addition, the advantages of model exploration in
the VR environment were pointed out.
This article is structured as follows: the introduction (Section 1) is followed by literature examples
of 3D city model representations and di erent use cases (Section 2). In Section 3, the study area
characteristics, overall methodological workﬂow, and the datasets are presented. Model implementation
results of the existing LoD2 city model and future smart city concept in LoD3, as well as encountered
problems and their solutions, are explained in detail in Section 4. Further details on the virtual web
globe and Unity game engine visualization methodology and the results are explained in Section 5.
Section 6 is dedicated to the discussion. Conclusions drawn from the study are provided in the ﬁnal
section with future recommendations.
2. Related Work
Although the development of 3D GIS was initially limited to urban planning and visualization [ 22],
with the recent developments in computer software, hardware, and new reconstruction methods,
it expanded beyond these limits. With recent applications such as locations, conditions, trends,
patterns, and models, 3D GIS platforms are becoming more practical [ 23]. For example, 3D city
models were applied in di erent use cases in the literature, such as noise mapping [ 24], web-based
visualization [ 25], volunteered geographic information [ 26], energy demand estimation [ 27], forest
simulation [ 28], augmented reality [ 29], real estate [ 30], air quality [ 31], tsunami analysis [ 32], protected
area planning [33], cultural heritage applications [34], campus models [35], etc.
The city models can be reconstructed manually [ 36], semi-automatically [ 37], or automatically [ 38]
from di erent data sources such as satellite imagery [ 39,40], large-format nadir aerial imagery [ 37],
oblique aerial imagery [ 41], unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) imagery [ 42], LiDAR (light detection and
ranging or laser imaging detection and ranging) point clouds [ 43], mobile laser scanning data [ 44],
or joint processing of di erent data sources [ 45–48]. Procedural city /building modeling is another
approach for producing extensive architectural models for computer games and movies, as well as
smart city concepts with high geometric detail at low cost, which are currently integrated in the
CityEngine Tool of ESRI (Redlands, CA, USA) [ 49,50]. With the latest developments in machine
learning methods and computer hardware, 3D city models can also be reconstructed using deep
learning approaches [51–53].
Three-dimensional visualization is deﬁned as a ﬁeld that provides tools for exploration and analysis
of spatial data [ 54], and it is popular in various disciplines [ 55,56]. A comprehensive review showed
that the majority of analyzed use cases had visualization as the main goal [ 55], which demonstrates
that visualization is an important focus of such models [ 56]. With the recent developments in web
and Internet technologies, access to services and spatial information from private individuals or
business applications is faster and easier than before [ 57]. The cartographic rules that can be applied
to web-based 3D city models are neither standardized nor fully investigated so far [ 58], although a
number of applications can be found in the literature (e.g., References [ 59,60]). Herman and ˇRezn ík [61]
compared di erent web technologies and data formats used in 3D model visualization in their study.
The recent developments in web technologies such as WebGL (Web Graphics Library) [ 62] and HTML5
(Hypertext Markup Language) led to new web-based visualization environments and products such as
CesiumJS [ 63], three.js [ 64], and Unity [ 65]. With WebGL technology, users can integrate and visualize
3D content on web browsers without any need for a plugin or extension. Furthermore, 3D city models
can be visualized on di erent platforms such as virtual web globes, smartphones [ 66], and game
engines for exploring them with VR [ 67,68]. The low cost and the widespread use of mixed reality | 3
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 4 of 26
and VR technologies allow urban simulations to be explored in game engines, such as Unity, Unreal
Engine, or CryEngine, which also o er free access to developers.
Virtual globes are now a standard way of visualizing and analyzing di erent types of geospatial
data for di erent disciplines [ 69–72]. Google Earth [ 73], Nasa World Wind [ 74], iTowns [ 75],
and CesiumJS are examples of virtual web globes. However, the use of 3D models on the web
has some technical challenges such as network speed and cross-platform support, and, due to the rare
support of 3D graphic application programming interface (API) cross-platform migration, developing
a 3D GIS environment that works on di erent operating systems and devices such as Windows, Linux,
Android, or iOS is costly and requires more e ort [76].
Interoperability of 3D city models still remains as a challenging task and still has many issues
to overcome [ 19,20,77]. CityGML [ 78] is an XML-based open-source data format for storing and
managing semantic 3D city models, and it is adopted by Open Geospatial Consortium [ 79] as an
international standard format. Although it supports interoperability between di erent applications,
it is not an appropriate data format for visualizing city models directly on a web platform [ 80].
For e cient visualization, CityGML data need to be converted into another format like COLLADA
(Collaborative Design Activity) [ 81], Extensible 3D (X3D) [ 82], or 3D Tiles [ 83]. Murshed et al. [ 84]
found that 3D Tiles is a suitable alternative for visualizing big volumes of 3D city models due to
its tiling property. Chaturverdi et al. [ 85] developed an interactive web client based for semantic
3D city models using HTML5 and WebGL. Wendel et al. [ 58] developed a plugin-free web-based
visualization semantic 3D city model of Karlsruhe, Germany. Farkas [ 86] compared the most capable
open-source web GIS libraries based on their feature coverage. Chen et al. [ 87] developed a workﬂow
for visualizing BIM (building information modeling) models on CesiumJS. Resch et al. [ 88] developed
a 3D web-based interface for visualizing marine data and pointed out the problems for visualization of
four-dimensional (4D) data (time as the fourth dimension). Four-dimensional data visualization can
increase the e ciency of exploring relationships in complex geospatial data with large volumes [ 89].
Three-dimensional city models are still mostly static, and adding the fourth dimension dynamically on
the on web is an emerging research area.
Three-dimensional terrain visualization also plays an important part in 3D city models, urban
visualization, and many more GIS applications [ 90]. The main reasons for visualizing the terrain along
with the 3D city model are (a) provision of a more realistic globe to the stakeholders, (b) completeness of
earth surface data, (c) higher reliability in decision-making process, and (d) suitability for a wider range
of applications such as engineering, disaster management, planning, etc. Visualizing terrains with
high volumes requires advanced rendering strategies [ 91] and e cient level of detail approaches [ 92].
Although several studies exist on the high-performance rendering of high-resolution terrains, the topic
still remains challenging. There are a few strategies in the literature for reducing the data volume
for the terrain and other geodata [ 93]. Campos et al. [ 94] explained the level of detail concept for
terrain models based on visible details depending on the perception of the user at a given a point of
view, and they tackled the problem of generating world-scale multi-resolution triangulated irregular
networks optimized for web-based visualization. Staso et al. [ 95] developed a multi-resolution and
multi-source terrain builder for CesiumJS.
Although there are several studies on di erent components or stages of 3D city model generation
and visualization, as brieﬂy summarized above, further researches and investigations in this ﬁeld are
required due to the complexity of the problem. Modeling our environment in 3D by adding the time
and semantic information is essential for many applications, and comprehensive investigations with
real-world data can facilitate the developments. | 4
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 5 of 26
3. Materials and Methods
3.1. Study Area
Gaziantep is located at the intersection of the Mediterranean and Southeastern Anatolia Region of
Turkey and is one of the oldest cities, inhabited for thousands of years. It is the most urbanized city
of the Southeastern Anatolia Region with a population over two million, developed industrial units,
and genuine culture. ¸ Sahinbey District located in Gaziantep City is Turkey’s third most populated
municipality with a population size of nearly one million. It has an area of 960 km2and a mean
altitude of 850 m above sea level. The 3D model of a part of ¸ Sahinbey was generated in this study
and merged with the smart city design models by (a) reconstructing the 3D model of the existing
neighborhoods using aerial photos obtained from a photogrammetric ﬂight mission, and (b) conversion
and georeferencing of the solid 3D model of the designed smart city in the pilot project. Both models
were integrated in a joint reference system and combined as a single city model. A general overview
of the study area, the boundaries of the modeled city parts and the designed future city, and the
perspective center positions of the aerial images used in the study are given in Figure 1.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 26 
 mean altitude of 850 m above sea level. The 3D model of a part of Şahinbey was generated in this 
study and merged with the smart city design mode ls by (a) reconstructing the 3D model of the 
existing neighborhood s using aerial photos obtained from a photogrammetric flight mission, and (b) 
conversion and georeferencing of the solid 3D model of the designed smart city in the pilot project. 
Both models were integrated in a joint reference system and combined as a single city model. A general overview of the study area, the boundaries of the modeled city parts and the designed future 
city, and the perspective cent er positions of the aerial images used in the study are given in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. A general view of the study area in Sahinb ey, Gaziantep with the boundaries of the 
reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) model of existing  city parts (white) and the designed future city 
(green). The perspective center positions of the aeri al photos used for the reconstruction are depicted 
with the blue points. 
3.2. Overview of the Methodology 
The study workflow consists of three main stages  as shown in Figure 2. The first stage is the 
generation of the LoD2 model of existing ne ighborhoods of the project area using aerial 
photogrammetric datasets. This model was also employ ed during the design stages of the future city 
model for visualization purposes. The second stage was the conversion of the LoD3 building models 
designed by the architects. Since the architectural designs were not geolocated and were not suitable 
for LoD3 model implementation with metric units,  extensive conversions were applied prior to the 
integration. In addition, the landscape plans and city furniture were also converted and integrated 
into the final model. The designed model included buildings, textures from design libraries for all 
model elements, vegetation, city furniture, transpor tation structure, and ot her units such as waste 
bins, Wi-Fi equipment, etc. The third stage invo lved implementation of different visualization 
platforms for different LoDs and performance optimization.  
  
Figure 1. A general view of the study area in Sahinbey, Gaziantep with the boundaries of the
reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) model of existing city parts (white) and the designed future city
(green). The perspective center positions of the aerial photos used for the reconstruction are depicted
with the blue points.
3.2. Overview of the Methodology
The study workﬂow consists of three main stages as shown in Figure 2. The ﬁrst stage is the
generation of the LoD2 model of existing neighborhoods of the project area using aerial photogrammetric
datasets. This model was also employed during the design stages of the future city model for
visualization purposes. The second stage was the conversion of the LoD3 building models designed | 5
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 6 of 26
by the architects. Since the architectural designs were not geolocated and were not suitable for LoD3
model implementation with metric units, extensive conversions were applied prior to the integration.
In addition, the landscape plans and city furniture were also converted and integrated into the ﬁnal
model. The designed model included buildings, textures from design libraries for all model elements,
vegetation, city furniture, transportation structure, and other units such as waste bins, Wi-Fi equipment,
etc. The third stage involved implementation of di erent visualization platforms for di erent LoDs
and performance optimization.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 26 
  
Figure 2. The overall workflow of the data production , model implementation, and visualization. 
For the first stage, a total of 736 aerial photos taken in 2015 with 80% forward overlap and 60% 
lateral overlap using an UltraCam Falcon large-fo rmat digital camera from Vexcel Imaging, Graz, 
Austria [96] were provided by the MoEU. The photos  were taken from an average altitude of 2500 m 
from mean sea level (MSL) with an average ground  sampling distance (GSD) of 10 cm ± 2 cm, which 
covered an area of 83 km2. The photogrammetric data production consisted of flight planning, ground 
control point (GCP) establishment, image acquisit ion, and aerial triangulation. The exterior 
orientation parameters (EOPs) were measured using global navigation satellite system (GNSS) receivers and an INS (inertial navigation system) in the TUREF/TM36 reference system defined with 
European Petroleum Survey Group (EPSG) Code 5 256 during the flight mission. The aerial 
triangulation was performed with Trimble Inpho software, and images were provided with the adjusted EOPs and the camera calibration data by  the MoEU. According to the national mapping 
regulations of Turkey, the photogrammetric triangulat ion should have an accuracy of better than 0.75 
times the GSD in planimetry and 1 GSD in height. The digital surface model (DSM) of the study area 
with a 30-cm grid interval and digital orthop hotos (10 cm GSD) was generated using Agisoft 
Metashape Professional, Agisoft LLC , St. Petersburg, Russia [97]. Base d on the literature, the DSM is 
expected to have an average point positioning accuracy of ca. 1 GSD (i.e., ~10 cm) in open terrain.  
The DTM with a 1-m grid interval was produced  by filtering the generated DSM using lastools 
software (rapidlasso GmbH, Gilching, Germany) [98] . Ground filtering is a widely used method for 
DTM production from point clouds. The “lasground ” module of lastools classifies the point cloud 
data as ground and non-ground po ints and converts ground points into a DTM. The quality of the 
generated DTM depends on the DSM quality and the step size parameter used in filtering. Several 
step size parameters were tested for finding the optimal value.  
In addition, true orthophotos generated by th e MoEU using Trimble Inpho software (Trimble 
Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) [99] were also provided for the project. The building footprints defined in the TUREF/TM36 projection system with semantic data were obtained from the GIS Department of 
Sahinbey Municipality, Gaziantep, in ESRI Shap efile format and exported to the CityGML format. 
The 3D city model in LoD2 was generated using the method proposed by Buyukdemircioglu et al. [37] with the DSM, the DTM, and the building footprints. In another study area, 73.8% of automatic building reconstruction accuracy was obtained for LoD2 model production with this method [37]. 
Figure 2. The overall workﬂow of the data production, model implementation, and visualization.
For the ﬁrst stage, a total of 736 aerial photos taken in 2015 with 80% forward overlap and 60%
lateral overlap using an UltraCam Falcon large-format digital camera from Vexcel Imaging, Graz,
Austria [ 96] were provided by the MoEU. The photos were taken from an average altitude of 2500 m
from mean sea level (MSL) with an average ground sampling distance (GSD) of 10 cm 2 cm, which
covered an area of 83 km2. The photogrammetric data production consisted of ﬂight planning, ground
control point (GCP) establishment, image acquisition, and aerial triangulation. The exterior orientation
parameters (EOPs) were measured using global navigation satellite system (GNSS) receivers and
an INS (inertial navigation system) in the TUREF /TM36 reference system deﬁned with European
Petroleum Survey Group (EPSG) Code 5256 during the ﬂight mission. The aerial triangulation was
performed with Trimble Inpho software, and images were provided with the adjusted EOPs and
the camera calibration data by the MoEU. According to the national mapping regulations of Turkey,
the photogrammetric triangulation should have an accuracy of better than 0.75 times the GSD in
planimetry and 1 GSD in height. The digital surface model (DSM) of the study area with a 30-cm grid
interval and digital orthophotos (10 cm GSD) was generated using Agisoft Metashape Professional,
Agisoft LLC, St. Petersburg, Russia [ 97]. Based on the literature, the DSM is expected to have an
average point positioning accuracy of ca. 1 GSD (i.e., ~10 cm) in open terrain.
The DTM with a 1-m grid interval was produced by ﬁltering the generated DSM using lastools
software (rapidlasso GmbH, Gilching, Germany) [ 98]. Ground ﬁltering is a widely used method for
DTM production from point clouds. The “lasground” module of lastools classiﬁes the point cloud
data as ground and non-ground points and converts ground points into a DTM. The quality of the | 6
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 7 of 26
generated DTM depends on the DSM quality and the step size parameter used in ﬁltering. Several step
size parameters were tested for ﬁnding the optimal value.
In addition, true orthophotos generated by the MoEU using Trimble Inpho software (Trimble
Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) [ 99] were also provided for the project. The building footprints deﬁned
in the TUREF /TM36 projection system with semantic data were obtained from the GIS Department
of Sahinbey Municipality, Gaziantep, in ESRI Shapeﬁle format and exported to the CityGML format.
The 3D city model in LoD2 was generated using the method proposed by Buyukdemircioglu et al. [ 37]
with the DSM, the DTM, and the building footprints. In another study area, 73.8% of automatic
building reconstruction accuracy was obtained for LoD2 model production with this method [ 37].
Although the building footprints and the resolution of the DSM were adequate for model reconstruction,
a DTM with at 1-m grid spacing was su cient for clamping buildings to the terrain and precisely
calculating building heights from the DTM. The generated models were automatically textured using
CityGRID software (UVM Systems, Klosterneuburg, Austria) [ 18] with a similar approach to that in
Reference [ 37]. Texturing improves the attractiveness of a 3D city model dramatically. Georeferenced
aerial oblique [ 100] and nadir [ 37] images can be used for texturing building roofs and façades,
and mobile images can be used for texturing street-side façades. The texture images were converted
from PNG (Portable Network Graphics) to JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) format for
reducing the texture data size and for increasing the visualization performance and stored in CityGML.
In the second stage, the future smart city design process was carried out using various CAD
software. Highly detailed LoD3 building models, city plansm and city furniture were designed using
Trimble SketchUp software (Trimble Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) [ 101]. Several problems encountered
during the conversion are given in more detail in Section 4.2, together with the solutions and the results.
The generated models were imported into Autodesk 3ds Max software (Autodesk, San Rafael, CA,
USA) [ 102] as an intermediate platform for polygon optimization, scaling, georeferencing, texturing,
and CityGML conversion operations. The number of polygons is an important factor that directly
aects the visualization performance of the produced models in a real-time rendering environment
like a game engine or web interface (the environment where the graphics card should render the entire
model vividly and ﬂuently). The model should be represented with a small number of polygons since
each surface brings additional load on hardware, particularly on the GPU (graphics processing unit).
In addition, the texture quality can be more important than the number of surfaces for representing
the details of the model. The texturing process was also manually carried out in 3ds Max using the
standard (default) channel for lossless conversion to CityGML. The ﬁnal models were ﬁrstly converted
to CityGRID XML (Extensible Markup Language) and then into CityGML format. All textures were
compressed in JPEG format by converting from PNG with FME software (Safe Software, Surrey,
Canada) [103]. Duplicates in textures were removed and merged into atlases and stored in CityGML.
For the CityGML conversion, the CityGRID Modeler plugin, which is a tool for editing, exporting,
georeferencing, and updating 3D city models created in 3ds Max, was employed. A Binary Large
Object (BLOB) converter tool for converting any geometry object in 3ds Max to CityGRID XML data
structure was used. The BLOB converter scans the ﬁle for objects of editable meshes and transforms
them into CityGRID objects.
In the last stage, all generated models were merged and visualized on the web using CesiumJS
virtual globe (www.bizimsehir.org /model) and the Unity game engine (www.bizimsehir.org /unity).
Virtual globes are used not only by professional users, but also by public users due to their intuitive
interface and web-based system [ 104]. Among the available open-source web globes, Cesium runs on a
GPU using WebGL and supports various geospatial data types, such as terrain, imagery layers, and 3D
geometries with high LoD and textures. The implemented 3D city model with buildings, ground plans,
and city furniture was also exported to the Unity game engine to provide a di erent visualization
experience to the users and stakeholders in an urban simulation environment with VR. Due to the
various optimization approaches used for the di erent visualization approaches, the methodological
details on this part are elaborated on further in Section 5 together with the results. | 7
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 8 of 26
4. Model Implementation Results
4.1. Semi-Automatic Model Generation of Existing 3D City Model in LoD2
The 3D city models of the three neighbor districts consisting of 1202 buildings were reconstructed
semi-automatically in LoD2 using photogrammetric techniques and large-format aerial images.
Semi-automatic 3D city model reconstruction was performed with BuildingReconstruction software
(virtualcitySYSTEMS GmbH, Berlin, Germany) [ 105]. The software uses a model-driven approach for
3D city model reconstruction, and it allows users to perform manual editing on the generated models.
After visual assessments, no manual editing was required in this study due to high-quality output.
The BuildingReconstruction software produces CityGML LoD2 3D city models using DSM, DTM in
raster format, and building footprint data as input. Attribute information, such as building name,
building condition, number of apartments, usage type, etc., obtained from the building footprint ﬁle,
was stored as semantic data in CityGML together with the geometries to perform queries.
The compatibility of the building footprint data provided by the municipality with the true
orthophotos provided by MoEU was visually compared using a simple overlay. The missing building
footprints were manually digitized from orthophotos, and the footprints of the newly constructed
buildings were deleted to ensure visual consistency of the model. A general view of the building
footprints and the borders of the modeled neighborhoods (three sub-districts) is shown in Figure 3.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 26 
 high-quality output. The BuildingReconstruction so ftware produces CityGML LoD2 3D city models 
using DSM, DTM in raster format, and building footprint data as input. Attribute information, such as building name, building condition, number of  apartments, usage type, etc., obtained from the 
building footprint file, was stored as semantic da ta in CityGML together with the geometries to 
perform queries.  
The compatibility of the building footprint data provided by the municipality with the true 
orthophotos provided by MoEU was visually compar ed using a simple overlay. The missing building 
footprints were manually digitize d from orthophotos, and the footprints of the newly constructed 
buildings were deleted to ensure visual consistenc y of the model. A general view of the building 
footprints and the borders of the modeled neighborhood s (three sub-districts) is shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. A general view of the boundaries of the modeled city districts and the building footprints 
located in the north of the project site.  
An overview of the generated DSM and the DTM ob tained with ground filtering can be seen in 
Figure 4 . The results demonstrate a smooth DTM with few errors in the locations of large buildings, 
as marked by the red polygon. 
 
Figure 4. An overview of the generated digital surfac e model (DSM) and the digital terrain model 
(DTM), showing one area (red) with DTM filtering errors.  
Figure 3. A general view of the boundaries of the modeled city districts and the building footprints
located in the north of the project site.
An overview of the generated DSM and the DTM obtained with ground ﬁltering can be seen in
Figure 4. The results demonstrate a smooth DTM with few errors in the locations of large buildings,
as marked by the red polygon.
Unity Game Engine visualization of the textured LoD2 model on DTM with the true-orthophoto
basemap is shown in Figure 5. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the reconstructed LoD2 model aligned
well with the DTM and the orthophoto, which demonstrates the consistency and high geometric
accuracy of the building geometries and textures with the related data. | 8
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 9 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 26 
 high-quality output. The BuildingReconstruction so ftware produces CityGML LoD2 3D city models 
using DSM, DTM in raster format, and building footprint data as input. Attribute information, such as building name, building condition, number of  apartments, usage type, etc., obtained from the 
building footprint file, was stored as semantic da ta in CityGML together with the geometries to 
perform queries.  
The compatibility of the building footprint data provided by the municipality with the true 
orthophotos provided by MoEU was visually compar ed using a simple overlay. The missing building 
footprints were manually digitize d from orthophotos, and the footprints of the newly constructed 
buildings were deleted to ensure visual consistenc y of the model. A general view of the building 
footprints and the borders of the modeled neighborhood s (three sub-districts) is shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. A general view of the boundaries of the modeled city districts and the building footprints 
located in the north of the project site.  
An overview of the generated DSM and the DTM ob tained with ground filtering can be seen in 
Figure 4 . The results demonstrate a smooth DTM with few errors in the locations of large buildings, 
as marked by the red polygon. 
 
Figure 4. An overview of the generated digital surfac e model (DSM) and the digital terrain model 
(DTM), showing one area (red) with DTM filtering errors.  
Figure 4. An overview of the generated digital surface model (DSM) and the digital terrain model
(DTM), showing one area (red) with DTM ﬁltering errors.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 26 
 Unity Game Engine visualization of the textur ed LoD2 model on DTM with the true-orthophoto 
basemap is shown in Figure 5. As can be seen fr om the figure, the reconstructed LoD2 model aligned 
well with the DTM and the orthophoto, which dem onstrates the consistency and high geometric 
accuracy of the building geometries and textures with the related data.  
 
Figure 5. Unity Game Engine visualization of the text ured LoD2 model together with the DTM and 
the true-orthophoto basemap. 
4.2. Design and Model Generation of the Future Smart City Model in LoD3 
SketchUp software is suitable for rapidly genera ting highly detailed 3D city models, but some 
post-processing was required since the models were not georeferenced and did not fit to the urban 
plans. In addition, due to the very high number of polygons involved in the models, the number of 
polygons for each building needed to be optimiz ed by manually eliminating the unnecessary ones. 
In the elimination process, it wa s considered not to cause any deformations to the visual details of 
the models. Through manual editing, the topologica l correctness of the mode l geometries was also 
ensured, and each object was assigned with a unique identification number. An example of the 
building models designed with the SketchUp tool is shown in Figure 6. Figure 7 shows the initial and optimized wireframe models of a building . 
 
Figure 6. Example of building models design ed in the SketchUp software. 
  
Figure 5. Unity Game Engine visualization of the textured LoD2 model together with the DTM and the
true-orthophoto basemap.
4.2. Design and Model Generation of the Future Smart City Model in LoD3
SketchUp software is suitable for rapidly generating highly detailed 3D city models, but some
post-processing was required since the models were not georeferenced and did not ﬁt to the urban
plans. In addition, due to the very high number of polygons involved in the models, the number of
polygons for each building needed to be optimized by manually eliminating the unnecessary ones.
In the elimination process, it was considered not to cause any deformations to the visual details of
the models. Through manual editing, the topological correctness of the model geometries was also
ensured, and each object was assigned with a unique identiﬁcation number. An example of the building
models designed with the SketchUp tool is shown in Figure 6. Figure 7 shows the initial and optimized
wireframe models of a building. | 9
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 10 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 26 
 Unity Game Engine visualization of the textur ed LoD2 model on DTM with the true-orthophoto 
basemap is shown in Figure 5. As can be seen fr om the figure, the reconstructed LoD2 model aligned 
well with the DTM and the orthophoto, which dem onstrates the consistency and high geometric 
accuracy of the building geometries and textures with the related data.  
 
Figure 5. Unity Game Engine visualization of the text ured LoD2 model together with the DTM and 
the true-orthophoto basemap. 
4.2. Design and Model Generation of the Future Smart City Model in LoD3 
SketchUp software is suitable for rapidly genera ting highly detailed 3D city models, but some 
post-processing was required since the models were not georeferenced and did not fit to the urban 
plans. In addition, due to the very high number of polygons involved in the models, the number of 
polygons for each building needed to be optimiz ed by manually eliminating the unnecessary ones. 
In the elimination process, it wa s considered not to cause any deformations to the visual details of 
the models. Through manual editing, the topologica l correctness of the mode l geometries was also 
ensured, and each object was assigned with a unique identification number. An example of the 
building models designed with the SketchUp tool is shown in Figure 6. Figure 7 shows the initial and optimized wireframe models of a building . 
 
Figure 6. Example of building models design ed in the SketchUp software. 
  
Figure 6. Example of building models designed in the SketchUp software.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 27 
  
 
Figure 7. A non-optimized building mode l with 1,278,000 polygons ( left) and an optimized building 
model with 24,000 polygons ( right ). 
Scaling and metric coordinates were other issues  faced in the model production. Although the 
georeferenced urban plan was developed first, the architectural designs were not metric and had some differences in comparison to the planned buil ding footprints. The main reasons were the choice 
of the design software by the architects and modi fications made in the detai led architectural designs. 
Most buildings were designed as in dividual units; they were also enlarged, shrunk, and rotated by 
the architects to work comfortably, and they were without georeferencing. Since the 3ds Max 
software does not support any projected coordinate  system, it was not possible to directly use the 
models in the city model context. Another reason wa s that the 3ds Max software supports up to eight-
digit coordinates, including decimal characters. Therefore, when modeling with 3ds Max, an arbitrary local coordinate system was used with redu ced coordinates by “shifting the plan to zero”, 
to limit all values to eight digits at maximum. In  order to georeference the models precisely, the 2D 
urban plan developed by the urban planners was em ployed with the same r eduction (offset) values, 
and the 3D building models were placed manually on the urban plan. A part of the urban plan 
[16,106] can be seen in Figure 8. A close view of a building model before and after texturing is shown 
in Figure 9. 
Figure 7. A non-optimized building model with 1,278,000 polygons ( top) and an optimized building
model with 24,000 polygons ( bottom ).
Scaling and metric coordinates were other issues faced in the model production. Although the
georeferenced urban plan was developed ﬁrst, the architectural designs were not metric and had some
dierences in comparison to the planned building footprints. The main reasons were the choice of
the design software by the architects and modiﬁcations made in the detailed architectural designs.
Most buildings were designed as individual units; they were also enlarged, shrunk, and rotated by the
architects to work comfortably, and they were without georeferencing. Since the 3ds Max software does
not support any projected coordinate system, it was not possible to directly use the models in the city
model context. Another reason was that the 3ds Max software supports up to eight-digit coordinates,
including decimal characters. Therefore, when modeling with 3ds Max, an arbitrary local coordinate | 10
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 11 of 26
system was used with reduced coordinates by “shifting the plan to zero”, to limit all values to eight
digits at maximum. In order to georeference the models precisely, the 2D urban plan developed by the
urban planners was employed with the same reduction (o set) values, and the 3D building models
were placed manually on the urban plan. A part of the urban plan [ 16,106] can be seen in Figure 8.
A close view of a building model before and after texturing is shown in Figure 9.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 26 
   
Figure 7. A non-optimized building mode l with 1,278,000 polygons ( left) and an optimized building 
model with 24,000 polygons ( right ). 
Scaling and metric coordinates were other issues  faced in the model production. Although the 
georeferenced urban plan was developed first, the architectural designs were not metric and had some differences in comparison to the planned buil ding footprints. The main reasons were the choice 
of the design software by the architects and modi fications made in the detai led architectural designs. 
Most buildings were designed as in dividual units; they were also enlarged, shrunk, and rotated by 
the architects to work comfortably, and they were without georeferencing. Since the 3ds Max 
software does not support any projected coordinate  system, it was not possible to directly use the 
models in the city model context. Another reason wa s that the 3ds Max software supports up to eight-
digit coordinates, including decimal characters. Therefore, when modeling with 3ds Max, an arbitrary local coordinate system was used with redu ced coordinates by “shifting the plan to zero”, 
to limit all values to eight digits at maximum. In  order to georeference the models precisely, the 2D 
urban plan developed by the urban planners was em ployed with the same r eduction (offset) values, 
and the 3D building models were placed manually on the urban plan. A part of the urban plan 
[16,106] can be seen in Figure 8. A close view of a building model before and after texturing is shown in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 8. A part of the project site plan with georeferencing information in  two dimensions (2D) 
[16,106]. 
  
Figure 8. A part of the project site plan with georeferencing information in two dimensions (2D) [ 16,106].
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 26 
   
Figure 9. A close-up view of building model before texturing ( left) and after texturing ( right ). 
The surface normal (or normal vector) is another important factor in model generation that 
identifies the surface direction (front or back face).  The direction of the vector depends on the order 
of the vertices and coordinate system definition (right- or left-handed). The front face of the model surface is the direction of the thumb. In the real-tim e visualization of models such as in a game engine, 
the surfaces can be shown as two-sided by doubling the surfaces, which brings more load to the graphics card. If the surface normal faces the right,  a stereo view is created because the graphic card 
shows two surfaces in the same position. The fa ce normals can be checked in 3ds Max using the 
FaceNormal function or rendering. In order to av oid problems that may occur while visualizing the 
model in a game engine, architectural models need be produced following the requirements of real-
time visualization in terms of data size (e.g., sm all number of polygons, small texture files, etc.). 
Buildings and the urban design plan with city furniture were converted and saved in CityGRID 
XML format in separate files; then, each part was exported to CityGML with the CityGRID Modeler 
plugin. Before exporting models to CityGML, some  parameters like coordinate offsets and texture 
quality must be set by the user. The CityGRID plug in can also generate semantic data automatically 
for each building with options such as 2D Area, LoD1 Height, LoD2 Eave Height, LoD2 Ridge Height, 
LoD2 Roof Area, and Roof Type. The BLOB conver sion parameters and City GML export parameters 
are given in Figure 10. A part of the future city model in 3ds Max is shown in Figure 11. 
  
Figure 10. The Binary Large Object (BLOB) conversion parameters ( left) and CityGML export 
parameters ( right ). 
  
Figure 9. A close-up view of building model before texturing ( left) and after texturing ( right ).
The surface normal (or normal vector) is another important factor in model generation that
identiﬁes the surface direction (front or back face). The direction of the vector depends on the order
of the vertices and coordinate system deﬁnition (right- or left-handed). The front face of the model
surface is the direction of the thumb. In the real-time visualization of models such as in a game
engine, the surfaces can be shown as two-sided by doubling the surfaces, which brings more load to
the graphics card. If the surface normal faces the right, a stereo view is created because the graphic
card shows two surfaces in the same position. The face normals can be checked in 3ds Max using
the FaceNormal function or rendering. In order to avoid problems that may occur while visualizing
the model in a game engine, architectural models need be produced following the requirements of
real-time visualization in terms of data size (e.g., small number of polygons, small texture ﬁles, etc.).
Buildings and the urban design plan with city furniture were converted and saved in CityGRID
XML format in separate ﬁles; then, each part was exported to CityGML with the CityGRID Modeler
plugin. Before exporting models to CityGML, some parameters like coordinate o sets and texture
quality must be set by the user. The CityGRID plugin can also generate semantic data automatically
for each building with options such as 2D Area, LoD1 Height, LoD2 Eave Height, LoD2 Ridge Height,
LoD2 Roof Area, and Roof Type. The BLOB conversion parameters and CityGML export parameters
are given in Figure 10. A part of the future city model in 3ds Max is shown in Figure 11. | 11
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 12 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 26 
   
Figure 9. A close-up view of building model before texturing ( left) and after texturing ( right ). 
The surface normal (or normal vector) is another important factor in model generation that 
identifies the surface direction (front or back face).  The direction of the vector depends on the order 
of the vertices and coordinate system definition (right- or left-handed). The front face of the model surface is the direction of the thumb. In the real-tim e visualization of models such as in a game engine, 
the surfaces can be shown as two-sided by doubling the surfaces, which brings more load to the graphics card. If the surface normal faces the right,  a stereo view is created because the graphic card 
shows two surfaces in the same position. The fa ce normals can be checked in 3ds Max using the 
FaceNormal function or rendering. In order to av oid problems that may occur while visualizing the 
model in a game engine, architectural models need be produced following the requirements of real-
time visualization in terms of data size (e.g., sm all number of polygons, small texture files, etc.). 
Buildings and the urban design plan with city furniture were converted and saved in CityGRID 
XML format in separate files; then, each part was exported to CityGML with the CityGRID Modeler 
plugin. Before exporting models to CityGML, some  parameters like coordinate offsets and texture 
quality must be set by the user. The CityGRID plug in can also generate semantic data automatically 
for each building with options such as 2D Area, LoD1 Height, LoD2 Eave Height, LoD2 Ridge Height, 
LoD2 Roof Area, and Roof Type. The BLOB conver sion parameters and City GML export parameters 
are given in Figure 10. A part of the future city model in 3ds Max is shown in Figure 11. 
  
Figure 10. The Binary Large Object (BLOB) conversion parameters ( left) and CityGML export 
parameters ( right ). 
  
Figure 10. The Binary Large Object (BLOB) conversion parameters ( left) and CityGML export
parameters ( right ).
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 26 
  
Figure 11. A part of the future city concept model in 3ds Max tool. 
5. High-Performance Visualization Results 
5.1. Web-Based Visualization Using CesiumJS 
According to Chaturvedi et al. [85], the main features of Cesium are support for visualizing 2D 
and 3D data (vector and raster) and web map services (WMS) on a web-interface, navigation with different camera angles and zoom levels, custom ization of object façade symbology, support for 
widely used reference systems, and dynamic visualiz ation. Based on the experiences obtained during 
this study, additional useful features of Cesium can be listed such as interface customization, utilization of the 3D Tiles format for streaming, styl ing, and interaction possibilities, visualization of 
high-resolution DTMs globally, creating info boxes fo r object selection and attribute display, enabling 
dynamic visual effects for atmospheric changes, shadows, fog, sun light, etc., and performance 
optimization for reduced GPU, CPU (central processing unit), and power utilization. 
The CityGML data were converted into 3D Tiles format for high-performance visualization on 
the web. The 3D Tiles format is a general specification for visualizing large heterogeneous 3D geospatial datasets such as buildings, textured meshes, or point clouds on CesiumJS virtual globe. It 
also supports rendering large volumes of datasets as  tiles. Through tiling, the amount of hardware 
resources used by web browser is reduced and the streaming performance is increased. The tiles were selected based on geometric error for detail-level and an adjustable pixel defect, so that multiple zoom levels in the same view could be obtained with high  performance. 3D Tiles st ores the tile geometries 
in glTF (Graphics Library Transmission Format) [1 07] format, which is the de facto format for 3D 
visualization applications, as well as for CesiumJS, and which can also store semantic data. The advantages and disadvantages of 3D Tiles expe rienced in this study are given in Table 1. 
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of 3D T iles as experienced in this study. 
Advantages Disadvantages 
• High performance while visualizing 
large and complex datasets. • Lack of support for visualizing the data 
directly from a geodatabase. 
• Storage of geometries and textures in 
the same file. • No online update possibility on the 
attribute data. 
• Lossless compression (Gzip) support 
for reducing file size. • Limited availability of open-source tools 
for CityGML to 3D Tiles conversion. 
• Picking, styling, and querying on 
dataset.  
Cesium ION [108] is a cloud-based hosting platform, which was also employed here, for 
optimizing, tiling, and serving the geodata, i.e., the 3D city model, high-resolution DTM, and true 
orthophotos. The visualization options in vestigated here are described below.  
Figure 11. A part of the future city concept model in 3ds Max tool.
5. High-Performance Visualization Results
5.1. Web-Based Visualization Using CesiumJS
According to Chaturvedi et al. [ 85], the main features of Cesium are support for visualizing 2D and
3D data (vector and raster) and web map services (WMS) on a web-interface, navigation with di erent
camera angles and zoom levels, customization of object façade symbology, support for widely used
reference systems, and dynamic visualization. Based on the experiences obtained during this study,
additional useful features of Cesium can be listed such as interface customization, utilization of the 3D
Tiles format for streaming, styling, and interaction possibilities, visualization of high-resolution DTMs
globally, creating info boxes for object selection and attribute display, enabling dynamic visual e ects
for atmospheric changes, shadows, fog, sun light, etc., and performance optimization for reduced GPU,
CPU (central processing unit), and power utilization.
The CityGML data were converted into 3D Tiles format for high-performance visualization on the
web. The 3D Tiles format is a general speciﬁcation for visualizing large heterogeneous 3D geospatial
datasets such as buildings, textured meshes, or point clouds on CesiumJS virtual globe. It also supports
rendering large volumes of datasets as tiles. Through tiling, the amount of hardware resources used by
web browser is reduced and the streaming performance is increased. The tiles were selected based
on geometric error for detail-level and an adjustable pixel defect, so that multiple zoom levels in | 12
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 13 of 26
the same view could be obtained with high performance. 3D Tiles stores the tile geometries in glTF
(Graphics Library Transmission Format) [ 107] format, which is the de facto format for 3D visualization
applications, as well as for CesiumJS, and which can also store semantic data. The advantages and
disadvantages of 3D Tiles experienced in this study are given in Table 1.
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of 3D Tiles as experienced in this study.
Advantages Disadvantages
 High performance while visualizing large and
complex datasets. Lack of support for visualizing the data directly
from a geodatabase.
 Storage of geometries and textures in the
same ﬁle. No online update possibility on the
attribute data.
 Lossless compression (Gzip) support for
reducing ﬁle size. Limited availability of open-source tools for
CityGML to 3D Tiles conversion.
 Picking, styling, and querying on dataset.
Cesium ION [ 108] is a cloud-based hosting platform, which was also employed here, for optimizing,
tiling, and serving the geodata, i.e., the 3D city model, high-resolution DTM, and true orthophotos.
The visualization options investigated here are described below.
5.1.1. High-Resolution Terrain Visualization
A 3D city model without a high-resolution DTM would also be incomplete and may provide
misleading information. If a sparse DTM is used with the city models, parts of the building models
may sink in the terrain or could hang in the air. Therefore, a high-resolution DTM (1 m or better)
coherent with the building models is essential to avoid visual deformations. CesiumJS is capable of
visualizing and streaming high-resolution DTMs in di erent formats. There is, however, support for
one DTM at a time, and a single ﬁle must be formed even for large regions. Terrains can be visualized
as regular grids or triangular irregular networks (TINs) in CesiumJS with the support of Heightmap
1.0 [109] or Quantized-mesh 1.0 [ 110] formats, respectively. The Heightmap 1.0 employs regular grids
in multi-resolutions and adjacent tiles, which also have a small overlap in order to ensure model
continuity. The Quantized-mesh 1.0 format pre-renders a TIN for each tile and can be better optimized
for di erent terrain types, such as by providing more details for rugged terrain surfaces. A visual
comparison of both formats is provided in Figure 12.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 26 
 5.1.1. High-Resolution Terrain Visualization 
A 3D city model without a high-resolution DT M would also be incomplete and may provide 
misleading information. If a sparse DTM is used with the city models, parts of the building models 
may sink in the terrain or could hang in the air. Therefore, a high-resolution DTM (1 m or better) 
coherent with the building models is essential to avoid visual deformations. CesiumJS is capable of 
visualizing and streaming high-resolution DTMs in different formats. There is, however, support for 
one DTM at a time, and a single file must be formed even for large regions. Terrains can be visualized 
as regular grids or triangular irregular networks (TINs) in CesiumJS with the support of Heightmap 
1.0 [109] or Quantized-mesh 1.0 [110] formats, respectively. The Heightmap 1.0 employs regular grids in multi-resolutions and adjacent tiles, which also have a small overlap in order to ensure model 
continuity. The Quantized-mesh 1.0 format pre-renders a TIN for each tile and can be better 
optimized for different terrain types, such as by providing more details for rugged terrain surfaces. 
A visual comparison of both formats is provided in  Figure 12. 
Figure 12. Regular and irregular representations of the terrain with Heightmap 1.0 ( left) and 
Quantized-mesh 1.0 ( right ) on Cesium. 
In this study, Cesium ION platform is employed  for generating and serving the Quantized-mesh 
terrain tileset as GeoTIFF, which is among the support ed raster file formats [111]. A number of raster 
pre-processing steps were performe d prior to the upload for seamless conversion, such as conversion 
to a single band of floating point or integer elevat ions, which must be defined with respect to either 
MSL (i.e., EGM96) or WGS84 (Wor ld Geodetic System 1984) Ellipsoid. The Cesium ION platform can 
combine uploaded terrain datasets with the Cesi um World Terrain (CWT) to create a new global 
terrain layer. CWT is a global coverage terrain mo del with several resolutions. Cesium ION Terrain 
Tiler replaces the area of the uploaded terrain model from the CWT and fuses it into a single Quantized-mesh terrain tileset optimized for efficient streaming into CesiumJS and other 3D engines. An example of CWT merged and unmerged with the high-resolution DTM produced in this study is shown in Figure 13 together with the textured LoD2 model. 
  
Figure 12. Regular and irregular representations of the terrain with Heightmap 1.0 ( left) and
Quantized-mesh 1.0 ( right ) on Cesium.
In this study, Cesium ION platform is employed for generating and serving the Quantized-mesh
terrain tileset as GeoTIFF, which is among the supported raster ﬁle formats [ 111]. A number of raster
pre-processing steps were performed prior to the upload for seamless conversion, such as conversion
to a single band of ﬂoating point or integer elevations, which must be deﬁned with respect to either | 13
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 14 of 26
MSL (i.e., EGM96) or WGS84 (World Geodetic System 1984) Ellipsoid. The Cesium ION platform can
combine uploaded terrain datasets with the Cesium World Terrain (CWT) to create a new global terrain
layer. CWT is a global coverage terrain model with several resolutions. Cesium ION Terrain Tiler
replaces the area of the uploaded terrain model from the CWT and fuses it into a single Quantized-mesh
terrain tileset optimized for e cient streaming into CesiumJS and other 3D engines. An example
of CWT merged and unmerged with the high-resolution DTM produced in this study is shown in
Figure 13 together with the textured LoD2 model.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 26 
   
Figure 13. An example of Cesium World Terrain merged ( left) and unmerged ( right ) with the high-
resolution DTM and with the textur ed LoD2 model in the study area. 
A pre-processing step on the DTM of the design ed future city was applied in order to conform 
the plans with the existing city parts, since usin g the original DTM for the project area would yield 
incompatibility and cause visual deformations. The project area was removed from the existing DTM 
and filled with a new DTM that complies with the designs using the FME software, implementing 
the Clipper, RasterCellValueReplace r, and RasterMosaicker transformers. A part of the designed city 
model with the high-resolution DTM before and after pre-processing can be seen in Figure 14. 
Figure 14. The planned city model with the original ( left) and pre-processed ( right ) DTM. 
5.1.2. Basemap Generation Using True Orthophotos 
High-resolution true orthophotos should be used as basemaps for fine visualization of 3D city 
models to provide a realistic impression and for ac curate positioning of the models on the virtual 
globe. True orthophotos provide better radiometric and geometric quality, since standard large-scale 
city orthophotos exhibit problems due to the disp lacements and occlusions [112]. High-resolution 
orthophotos were produced as part of the phot ogrammetric processing workflow, and the true 
orthophotos with the same resolution were comp ared visually. The true orthophotos were found 
superior due to smaller visual deformations  especially at roof edges (Figure 15).  
  
Figure 13. An example of Cesium World Terrain merged ( left) and unmerged ( right ) with the
high-resolution DTM and with the textured LoD2 model in the study area.
A pre-processing step on the DTM of the designed future city was applied in order to conform
the plans with the existing city parts, since using the original DTM for the project area would yield
incompatibility and cause visual deformations. The project area was removed from the existing DTM
and ﬁlled with a new DTM that complies with the designs using the FME software, implementing
the Clipper, RasterCellValueReplacer, and RasterMosaicker transformers. A part of the designed city
model with the high-resolution DTM before and after pre-processing can be seen in Figure 14.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 26 
   
Figure 13. An example of Cesium World Terrain merged ( left) and unmerged ( right ) with the high-
resolution DTM and with the textur ed LoD2 model in the study area. 
A pre-processing step on the DTM of the design ed future city was applied in order to conform 
the plans with the existing city parts, since usin g the original DTM for the project area would yield 
incompatibility and cause visual deformations. The project area was removed from the existing DTM 
and filled with a new DTM that complies with the designs using the FME software, implementing 
the Clipper, RasterCellValueReplace r, and RasterMosaicker transformers. A part of the designed city 
model with the high-resolution DTM before and after pre-processing can be seen in Figure 14. 
Figure 14. The planned city model with the original ( left) and pre-processed ( right ) DTM. 
5.1.2. Basemap Generation Using True Orthophotos 
High-resolution true orthophotos should be used as basemaps for fine visualization of 3D city 
models to provide a realistic impression and for ac curate positioning of the models on the virtual 
globe. True orthophotos provide better radiometric and geometric quality, since standard large-scale 
city orthophotos exhibit problems due to the disp lacements and occlusions [112]. High-resolution 
orthophotos were produced as part of the phot ogrammetric processing workflow, and the true 
orthophotos with the same resolution were comp ared visually. The true orthophotos were found 
superior due to smaller visual deformations  especially at roof edges (Figure 15).  
  
Figure 14. The planned city model with the original ( left) and pre-processed ( right ) DTM.
5.1.2. Basemap Generation Using True Orthophotos
High-resolution true orthophotos should be used as basemaps for ﬁne visualization of 3D city
models to provide a realistic impression and for accurate positioning of the models on the virtual
globe. True orthophotos provide better radiometric and geometric quality, since standard large-scale
city orthophotos exhibit problems due to the displacements and occlusions [ 112]. High-resolution
orthophotos were produced as part of the photogrammetric processing workﬂow, and the true
orthophotos with the same resolution were compared visually. The true orthophotos were found
superior due to smaller visual deformations especially at roof edges (Figure 15). | 14
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 15 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 26 
   
Figure 15. Radiometric comparison of ordinary orthophoto product ( left) and the true orthophoto 
(right ). The differences are especially noticeable at the roof edges. 
The true orthophoto files were tiled into nine GeoTIFF files, JPEG-compressed by 25%, and 
reprojected to the Web Mercator projection (EPSG: 3857), which is the default of Cesium ION; then, 
they were uploaded to Cesium ION and finally  converted into TMS and Web Map Tile Service 
(WMTS) imagery layers. When uploading multiple ov erlapping tiled imagery, all raster files must 
have the same resolution in order to avoid resolution  conflicts within the dataset. As a last step, true 
orthophoto basemaps were compared visually with various basemap imagery layers from other data 
providers using DTM and building models, as shown in Figure 16.  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 15. Radiometric comparison of ordinary orthophoto product ( left) and the true orthophoto
(right ). The di erences are especially noticeable at the roof edges.
The true orthophoto ﬁles were tiled into nine GeoTIFF ﬁles, JPEG-compressed by 25%,
and reprojected to the Web Mercator projection (EPSG:3857), which is the default of Cesium ION; then,
they were uploaded to Cesium ION and ﬁnally converted into TMS and Web Map Tile Service (WMTS)
imagery layers. When uploading multiple overlapping tiled imagery, all raster ﬁles must have the
same resolution in order to avoid resolution conﬂicts within the dataset. As a last step, true orthophoto
basemaps were compared visually with various basemap imagery layers from other data providers
using DTM and building models, as shown in Figure 16.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 26 
   
Figure 15. Radiometric comparison of ordinary orthophoto product ( left) and the true orthophoto 
(right ). The differences are especially noticeable at the roof edges. 
The true orthophoto files were tiled into nine GeoTIFF files, JPEG-compressed by 25%, and 
reprojected to the Web Mercator projection (EPSG: 3857), which is the default of Cesium ION; then, 
they were uploaded to Cesium ION and finally  converted into TMS and Web Map Tile Service 
(WMTS) imagery layers. When uploading multiple ov erlapping tiled imagery, all raster files must 
have the same resolution in order to avoid resolution  conflicts within the dataset. As a last step, true 
orthophoto basemaps were compared visually with various basemap imagery layers from other data 
providers using DTM and building models, as shown in Figure 16.  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 16. Cont. | 15
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 16 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 26 
   
(c) ( d) 
Figure 16. Three-dimensional buildings visualized on ( a) true orthophoto basemaps, ( b) Bing Maps, 
(c) Mapbox Satellite, and ( d) ESRI World Imagery. 
5.1.3. D City Model Visualization with 3D Tiles 
Prior to the conversion into the 3D Tiles format , a number of pre-processing and optimization 
steps were applied to the CityGML data for increa sing visualization performance and lowering the 
bandwidth usage. In the LoD3 future  city model, the building and ci ty furniture models, as well as 
the urban plan, were stored in separate CityGML files along with their textures. Textured CityGML 
files may contain thousands of separate image file s, which can easily reac h hundreds of megabytes 
just for a couple of buildings. There were redundan t texture data in the CityGML files that caused 
increased file sizes. Therefore, models with common textures were merged into a single CityGML file 
and the duplicates were removed. Two separate CityGML files with textures were created for 
buildings and landscape designs with furniture. These files were merged using the 3DCityDB software, which is an open-source software pack age for managing CityGML- based 3D city models 
developed at Munich Technical Univ ersity, Munich, Germany [113,114].  
Texture atlas is an image mosaicking method used to reduce the data size [115]. Atlased textures 
involving multiple facades were used for texturing buildings (Figure 17). When atlases are used instead of requesting a texture file for each façade, the hardware usage, rendering speed, and 
streaming performance can be optimized dramatically. A comparison of the number of textures and file size of the model before and after the optimization is given in Table 2. 
Figure 17. Examples of atlased textures of the building models. 
  
Figure 16. Three-dimensional buildings visualized on ( a) true orthophoto basemaps, ( b) Bing Maps,
(c) Mapbox Satellite, and ( d) ESRI World Imagery.
5.1.3. 3D City Model Visualization with 3D Tiles
Prior to the conversion into the 3D Tiles format, a number of pre-processing and optimization
steps were applied to the CityGML data for increasing visualization performance and lowering the
bandwidth usage. In the LoD3 future city model, the building and city furniture models, as well as the
urban plan, were stored in separate CityGML ﬁles along with their textures. Textured CityGML ﬁles
may contain thousands of separate image ﬁles, which can easily reach hundreds of megabytes just for
a couple of buildings. There were redundant texture data in the CityGML ﬁles that caused increased
ﬁle sizes. Therefore, models with common textures were merged into a single CityGML ﬁle and the
duplicates were removed. Two separate CityGML ﬁles with textures were created for buildings and
landscape designs with furniture. These ﬁles were merged using the 3DCityDB software, which is an
open-source software package for managing CityGML-based 3D city models developed at Munich
Technical University, Munich, Germany [113,114].
Texture atlas is an image mosaicking method used to reduce the data size [ 115]. Atlased textures
involving multiple facades were used for texturing buildings (Figure 17). When atlases are used
instead of requesting a texture ﬁle for each façade, the hardware usage, rendering speed, and streaming
performance can be optimized dramatically. A comparison of the number of textures and ﬁle size of
the model before and after the optimization is given in Table 2.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 26 
   
(c) ( d) 
Figure 16. Three-dimensional buildings visualized on ( a) true orthophoto basemaps, ( b) Bing Maps, 
(c) Mapbox Satellite, and ( d) ESRI World Imagery. 
5.1.3. D City Model Visualization with 3D Tiles 
Prior to the conversion into the 3D Tiles format , a number of pre-processing and optimization 
steps were applied to the CityGML data for increa sing visualization performance and lowering the 
bandwidth usage. In the LoD3 future  city model, the building and ci ty furniture models, as well as 
the urban plan, were stored in separate CityGML files along with their textures. Textured CityGML 
files may contain thousands of separate image file s, which can easily reac h hundreds of megabytes 
just for a couple of buildings. There were redundan t texture data in the CityGML files that caused 
increased file sizes. Therefore, models with common textures were merged into a single CityGML file 
and the duplicates were removed. Two separate CityGML files with textures were created for 
buildings and landscape designs with furniture. These files were merged using the 3DCityDB software, which is an open-source software pack age for managing CityGML- based 3D city models 
developed at Munich Technical Univ ersity, Munich, Germany [113,114].  
Texture atlas is an image mosaicking method used to reduce the data size [115]. Atlased textures 
involving multiple facades were used for texturing buildings (Figure 17). When atlases are used instead of requesting a texture file for each façade, the hardware usage, rendering speed, and 
streaming performance can be optimized dramatically. A comparison of the number of textures and file size of the model before and after the optimization is given in Table 2. 
Figure 17. Examples of atlased textures of the building models. 
  
Figure 17. Examples of atlased textures of the building models. | 16
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 17 of 26
Table 2. Comparison of the number of the texture images and the total ﬁle sizes before and
after optimization.
LoD2 Models
PNG TexturesLoD2 Models
JPEG TexturesLandscape Plan
and Furniture
(Before)Landscape Plan
and Furniture
(After)LoD3
Buildings
(Before)LoD3
Buildings
(After)
15.454 ﬁles 15.454 ﬁles 608 ﬁles 33 ﬁles 3.847 ﬁles 154 ﬁles
709 MB 100 MB 1.233 MB 83.1 MB 568 MB 94.4 MB
Although there are open-source tools for converting CityGML to 3D Tiles, only Cesium ION
provides lossless conversion, and it was used here for the conversion. 3D Tiles is a hierarchical
tile format, and the streaming performance depends on the geometry and rendering optimizations.
The smaller data size allows for faster streaming and rendering on the web interface. The lossless
gzipping support of 3D Tiles also increases rendering, streaming, and runtime performance and
improves the e ciency and the speed of transmitting the 3D content over the web. Draco compression
is another solution, which compresses vertices, normals, colors, texture coordinates, and any other
generic attributes [ 116]. The models had smaller data size after the compression and were streamed
faster using 3D Tiles due to its ability to stream glTF models when new tiles come into view or a new
LoD is required.
In this study, the LoD2 model was enriched with attributes coming from GIS database, and the
LoD3 future city model had few semantic data, such as height, terrain height, latitude, longitude,
and number of rendered primitives, which were automatically generated from geometries by Cesium
ION while converting from CityGML to 3D Tiles without any loss. Improper attribute data types (string,
integer, double) prevent the functioning of querying or styling on the generated models. 3D Tiles
Batch and feature tables were employed for semantic data conversion. A web interface prototype
was developed on which the buildings and other types of objects can be selected, styled, and queried,
such as grouping the objects with respect to their attributes (e.g., coloring buildings with longitudes
as shown Figure 18). An example of building attributes displayed on the web interface is shown
in Figure 19. Additional functionality such as mensuration of building heights, terrain elevation,
and angles on the displayed model was also developed in the prototype (Figure 20).
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 26 
 Table 2. Comparison of the number of the texture imag es and the total file sizes before and after 
optimization. 
LoD2 Models 
PNG 
Textures LoD2 Models 
JPEG 
Textures Landscape Plan 
and Furniture 
(Before) Landscape Plan 
and Furniture 
(After) LoD3 
Buildings 
(Before) LoD3 
Buildings 
(After) 
15.454 files 15.454 files 608 files 33 files 3.847 files 154 files 
709 MB 100 MB 1.233 MB 83.1 MB 568 MB 94.4 MB 
Although there are open-source tools for conver ting CityGML to 3D Tiles, only Cesium ION 
provides lossless conversion, and it was used here fo r the conversion. 3D Tiles is a hierarchical tile 
format, and the streaming performance depends on  the geometry and rendering optimizations. The 
smaller data size allows for faster streaming and rendering on the web interface. The lossless 
gzipping support of 3D Tiles also increases re ndering, streaming, and runtime performance and 
improves the efficiency and the speed of transm itting the 3D content over the web. Draco 
compression is another solution, which compresses ve rtices, normals, colors, texture coordinates, and 
any other generic attributes [116]. The models had smaller data size after the compression and were streamed faster using 3D Tiles due to its ability to stream glTF models when new tiles come into view 
or a new LoD is required.  
In this study, the LoD2 model was enriched with  attributes coming from GIS database, and the 
LoD3 future city model had few semantic data, such as height, terrain height, latitude, longitude, and 
number of rendered primitives, which were automa tically generated from geometries by Cesium 
ION while converting from CityGML to 3D Tiles without any loss. Improper attribute data types 
(string, integer, double) prevent the functioning of  querying or styling on the generated models. 3D 
Tiles Batch and feature tables were employed fo r semantic data conversion. A web interface 
prototype was developed on which the buildings and other types of objects ca n be selected, styled, 
and queried, such as grouping the objects with respec t to their attributes (e.g.,  coloring buildings with 
longitudes as shown Figure 18). An example of building attributes displayed on the web interface is 
shown in Figure 19. Additional functionality such as mensuration of building heights, terrain 
elevation, and angles on the displayed model wa s also developed in the prototype (Figure 20). 
 
Figure 18. LoD2 building models model colored with their longitudes using 3D Tiles styling. 
Figure 18. LoD2 building models model colored with their longitudes using 3D Tiles styling. | 17
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 18 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 26 
  
Figure 19. Displaying selected LoD2 buildings attribute table on the customized web interface. 
  
Figure 20. Component distance ( left) and area measurement tool ( right ) on the developed web 
interface. 
5.2. Exploring Smart Cities with Virtual Reality in Unity Game Engine 
All objects generated in 3ds Max could be convert ed into Unity with their position, rotation, and 
scale information using Autodesk FBX [117,118] wi thout any loss, since the model implementation 
stage (georeferencing, scaling, etc.) was performed considering the Unity requirements as well. The vertex colors, normals, and textures were expo rted as multiple materials per mesh. Sound and 
moving effects, such as people talking, trees sway ing in the wind, etc., were also added in order to 
create a lively urban simulation. Su ch approaches can be useful for th e improved interpretation of an 
environment, such as understanding the level of city noise at a certain location by hearing in the simulation. A view of generated LoD3 model in th e Unity game engine can be seen in Figure 21. 
  
Figure 19. Displaying selected LoD2 buildings attribute table on the customized web interface.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 26 
  
Figure 19. Displaying selected LoD2 buildings attribute table on the customized web interface. 
  
Figure 20. Component distance ( left) and area measurement tool ( right ) on the developed web 
interface. 
5.2. Exploring Smart Cities with Virtual Reality in Unity Game Engine 
All objects generated in 3ds Max could be convert ed into Unity with their position, rotation, and 
scale information using Autodesk FBX [117,118] wi thout any loss, since the model implementation 
stage (georeferencing, scaling, etc.) was performed considering the Unity requirements as well. The vertex colors, normals, and textures were expo rted as multiple materials per mesh. Sound and 
moving effects, such as people talking, trees sway ing in the wind, etc., were also added in order to 
create a lively urban simulation. Su ch approaches can be useful for th e improved interpretation of an 
environment, such as understanding the level of city noise at a certain location by hearing in the simulation. A view of generated LoD3 model in th e Unity game engine can be seen in Figure 21. 
  
Figure 20. Component distance ( left) and area measurement tool ( right ) on the developed web interface.
5.2. Exploring Smart Cities with Virtual Reality in Unity Game Engine
All objects generated in 3ds Max could be converted into Unity with their position, rotation,
and scale information using Autodesk FBX [ 117,118] without any loss, since the model implementation
stage (georeferencing, scaling, etc.) was performed considering the Unity requirements as well.
The vertex colors, normals, and textures were exported as multiple materials per mesh. Sound and
moving e ects, such as people talking, trees swaying in the wind, etc., were also added in order to
create a lively urban simulation. Such approaches can be useful for the improved interpretation of
an environment, such as understanding the level of city noise at a certain location by hearing in the
simulation. A view of generated LoD3 model in the Unity game engine can be seen in Figure 21.
The VR technology requires both special hardware and software for exploring the model such
as a VR-ready GPU and VR headset. In this study, the generated urban simulation was explored
using the HTC Vive [ 119] virtual reality headset, SteamVR [ 120] software, and GeForce GTX 1080 GPU.
The scene was produced in two di erent versions: one for exploring model with the combination of
keyboard and mouse and one was for exploring with the VR headset (Figure 22). | 18
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 19 of 26
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 26 
  
Figure 21. Unity simulation of the LoD3 future city model generated in the study. 
The VR technology requires both special hardware and software for exploring the model such 
as a VR-ready GPU and VR headset. In this st udy, the generated urban simulation was explored 
using the HTC Vive [119] virtual reality headset, SteamVR [120] software, and GeForce GTX 1080 GPU. The scene was produced in two different versions: one for exploring model with the combination of keyboard and mouse and one was for exploring with the VR headset (Figure 22).  
  
Figure 22. Virtual reality exploration of the LoD3 future city model using the Unity Game Engine 
environment. 
6. Discussion 
The present study showed that the generation of hi ghly detailed 3D city models is a challenging 
task in many aspects and requires expertise with various software and extensive manual effort. Aerial photogrammetric techniques provide the most suitab le and cost-effective data for generating the 
LoD2 3D city models semi-automatically. Basemaps , high-resolution DTMs, and building textures 
can also be generated from the large-format aerial im ages. Parts of these tasks, such as high-resolution 
DTM and building geometry extraction, can also be accomplished using multi-view very-high-resolution satellite imagery, but with less geometric detail and lower texture quality. 
Integration of the models coming from differ ent sources has certain challenges, such as 
differences in resolution and accuracy, topological consistency, etc. This study could overcome these 
issues since both models were located in different parts of the terrain and merged through the high-
resolution DTM. The LoD2 model had a geometric a ccuracy of ca. 10 cm co ming from the aerial 
Figure 21. Unity simulation of the LoD3 future city model generated in the study.
Remote Sens. 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 26 
  
Figure 21. Unity simulation of the LoD3 future city model generated in the study. 
The VR technology requires both special hardware and software for exploring the model such 
as a VR-ready GPU and VR headset. In this st udy, the generated urban simulation was explored 
using the HTC Vive [119] virtual reality headset, SteamVR [120] software, and GeForce GTX 1080 GPU. The scene was produced in two different versions: one for exploring model with the combination of keyboard and mouse and one was for exploring with the VR headset (Figure 22).  
  
Figure 22. Virtual reality exploration of the LoD3 future city model using the Unity Game Engine 
environment. 
6. Discussion 
The present study showed that the generation of hi ghly detailed 3D city models is a challenging 
task in many aspects and requires expertise with various software and extensive manual effort. Aerial photogrammetric techniques provide the most suitab le and cost-effective data for generating the 
LoD2 3D city models semi-automatically. Basemaps , high-resolution DTMs, and building textures 
can also be generated from the large-format aerial im ages. Parts of these tasks, such as high-resolution 
DTM and building geometry extraction, can also be accomplished using multi-view very-high-resolution satellite imagery, but with less geometric detail and lower texture quality. 
Integration of the models coming from differ ent sources has certain challenges, such as 
differences in resolution and accuracy, topological consistency, etc. This study could overcome these 
issues since both models were located in different parts of the terrain and merged through the high-
resolution DTM. The LoD2 model had a geometric a ccuracy of ca. 10 cm co ming from the aerial 
Figure 22. Virtual reality exploration of the LoD3 future city model using the Unity Game Engine
environment.
6. Discussion
The present study showed that the generation of highly detailed 3D city models is a challenging
task in many aspects and requires expertise with various software and extensive manual e ort. Aerial
photogrammetric techniques provide the most suitable and cost-e ective data for generating the LoD2
3D city models semi-automatically. Basemaps, high-resolution DTMs, and building textures can also
be generated from the large-format aerial images. Parts of these tasks, such as high-resolution DTM
and building geometry extraction, can also be accomplished using multi-view very-high-resolution
satellite imagery, but with less geometric detail and lower texture quality.
Integration of the models coming from di erent sources has certain challenges, such as di erences
in resolution and accuracy, topological consistency, etc. This study could overcome these issues since
both models were located in di erent parts of the terrain and merged through the high-resolution
DTM. The LoD2 model had a geometric accuracy of ca. 10 cm coming from the aerial images and
photogrammetric triangulation. The designed buildings needed to be edited extensively to reduce the
data size and ensure topological consistency within the models. They were georeferenced by scaling
and manually ﬁtting to the urban plan. Thus, visual and topological consistency could be ensured
in the area by using high-resolution and accurate datasets. The importance of DTM quality must be
particularly emphasized here, since it is the connecting medium for the models. | 19
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 20 of 26
High-performance visualization of the 3D models often requires post-processing for geometry
optimization; thus, the hardware requirements and the bandwidth usage can be reduced for rapid
visualization by decreasing the data size. Using texture atlases for this purpose is a solution that is
recommended for reducing the data size. Integrating the existing digital cities with the planned models
and using joint visualization platforms, such as Cesium JS, Unity, etc., can facilitate participatory
planning and decision-making by providing realistic 3D representations of the designs in the
environment that they belong to, which can assist discussions by ensuring improved visual experience
and understanding of the designs, as well as help to present the developed concepts and designs to
the public in order to collect their opinion for potential improvements. However, if the platform has
weaknesses such as poor streaming and model exploration performance, low geometric accuracy and
visual correctness, inconsistent data, and a lack of querying and analysis options, the usage would
be limited.
Open-source CesiumJS was found to be a suitable tool for visualizing the 3D city model, terrain,
and basemaps on the virtual web globe, while also relating them to the 3D GIS environment. It provides
the capability of switching between di erent datasets in di erent LoDs to the users. In addition to the
building models and semantic information, the 3D Tiles format provides a good solution for various
applications. The city models in CityGML format can be directly converted into 3D Tiles without losing
any geometric and semantic information. Instead of loading the entire city model at once, tile-based
model loading provides users higher performance on the web interface and reduces hardware load on
the computer.
Currently, the main issue in web-based visualization of 3D city models using open-source software
is the model updating. Since the visualized model is static and not directly visualized from a database
or a similar dynamic source, the whole model must be generated again every time there is an update on
the model. Serving a city model with topography directly from a spatial database management system
(DBMS) to the web interface would eliminate this problem. E cient geospatial database solutions
should be developed for high-performance visualization of city and terrain models, which is of great
importance for updating such models.
It was observed throughout the study that using game engines and VR technology has certain
advantages, such as joint provision of an improved visual experience on the designed and the real
environments. Using visual e ects in the created scene also provides a lively feeling. Game engines
mainly use a GPU, enable visualization of more detailed scenes, and provide higher FPS (frames
per second) compared to web-based visualization. Using VR with game engines gives users a more
realistic exploration of the model with animations, sound e ects, and better interaction possibilities
with the model. Exploring the model at the street level is also possible. On the other hand, the scenes
created in Unity are standalone tools and cannot provide the advantages of a 3D webGIS platform,
such as querying, online data sharing, using di erent basemaps and other web based data services,
spatial analysis, semantic data integration, etc.
7. Conclusions and Future Work
The outcomes of this study can be seen from the perspective of the development of a 3D GIS
environment with highly detailed 3D city models, true orthophotos, and high-resolution terrain models
as base data. Such systems can support the demands of smart city projects by ensuring the inclusion of
professionals from various disciplines and citizens in solving problems. Development of such systems
is an active research area and has several challenges, such as production, management, and updating
of 3D object geometries, semantic data integration, implementation of specialized spatial queries,
high-performance visualization, cross-platform accessibility, geometry validation procedures, etc.
Photogrammetry and remote sensing methods can provide the data required for generating accurate
and detailed geometries and for updating them regularly.
This study demonstrated the modeling stages of an integrated 3D city model of an existing
city section and a designed future city in LoD2 and LoD3, respectively; it also investigated di erent | 20
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 21 of 26
visualization platforms and performance optimization procedures. In the model implementation stage
of existing urban areas, photogrammetric techniques can be used as the primary data source. Future
cities are often designed in CAD environments and their conversion into geographical data exchange
formats and applications, such as CityGML, requires extensive editing and format transformations.
Lossless conversion between di erent systems can be a challenging task. Fusion of multi-source and
multi-temporal data also requires special attention. Here, the CityGML format was preferred since
semantic data, texture, and object geometries could be stored in an integrated manner and the format
could be converted to 3D visualization formats for di erent platforms.
Web-based high-performance visualization of detailed 3D city models is still a challenging
task. The CesiumJS library and Unity game engine were implemented and compared for di erent
aspects, such as sense of realism for the users, level of details in the models, visualization performances,
object and data type compatibility, inclusion of semantic data, ﬂexibility in using external data resources
such as web map and web feature services, querying, styling, etc. CesiumJS was found to be a suitable
platform for the development of a 3D GIS with online data access and provision of a participatory
planning environment. On the other hand, Unity with VR support has more attractive visual e ects
and improved sense of reality for users who intend to feel the future smart city within an actual
geographical context.
Future work related to the developed platform is almost unlimited. The interior designs of
the buildings (LoD4) can be integrated into the models. BIM data, which can be produced with
photogrammetric techniques, can also be integrated into the models and presented on both platforms.
Various building models or future city concepts can be alternatively visualized in the developed
CesiumJS virtual globe supported platform. Semantic data can be diversiﬁed and integrated into the
generated smart city concept for developing new queries and styling methods on the web interface.
In addition, a more comprehensive 3D GIS environment with an extended number of data layers for
spatial analysis, environmental modeling, and simulation is possible to especially aid urban governance.
Interaction possibilities for multiple users for modifying the model geometries could also be of interest
for ecient communication and collaboration, which is currently not possible within the proposed
framework. Finally, provision of up-to-date and accurate data is essential to ensure the continuity and
usability of the developed platform, such as for monitoring the construction stages of the designed
future city or for integrating recent environmental data. Remote sensing and photogrammetry data are
the primary sources for data collection and validation.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.K. and M.B.; methodology, software, investigation, data curation,
writing—original draft preparation, and visualization, M.B.; validation, formal analysis, resources, supervision,
writing—review and editing, project administration, and funding acquisition, S.K. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Ministry of Environment and Urbanization, Turkey.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Alpaslan Tütüneken for providing CityGRID software and
the Ministry of Environment and Urbanization for providing the data and funding the project. The authors are
also grateful for having the possibility to collaborate with the Bizimsehir Gaziantep project team. The authors
sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments and suggestions.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
References
1. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social A airs, Population Division. World Urbanization
Prospects: The 2018 Revision. 2019. Available online: https: //population.un.org /wup/Publications /Files/
WUP2018-Report.pdf (accessed on 5 May 2020).
2. United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 11. Available online: https: //sustainabledevelopment.un.org /
sdg11 (accessed on 5 May 2020).
3. Albino, V .; Berardi, U.; Dangelico, R.M. Smart cities: Deﬁnitions, dimensions, performance, and initiatives.
J. Urban Technol. 2015 ,22, 3–21. [CrossRef] | 21
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 22 of 26
4. Alawadhi, S.; Aldama-Nalda, A.; Chourabi, H.; Gil-Garcia, J.R.; Leung, S.; Mellouli, S.; Nam, T.; Pardo, T.A.;
Scholl, H.J.; Walker, S. Building understanding of smart city initiatives. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Electronic Government, Kristiansand, Norway, 3–6 September 2012; pp. 40–53.
5. Fernandez-Anez, V .; Fern ández-Güell, J.M.; Gi nger, R. Smart City implementation and discourses:
An integrated conceptual model. The case of Vienna. Cities 2018 ,78, 4–16. [CrossRef]
6. Aliaga, D.G. Integrating urban simulation and visualization. In Digital Urban Modeling and Simulation ;
Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2012; pp. 262–276.
7. Schrotter, G.; Hürzeler, C. The digital twin of the city of Zurich for urban planning. PFG J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. Geoinf. Sci. 2020 , 1–14. [CrossRef]
8. Ledoux, H.; Ohori, K.A.; Kumar, K.; Dukai, B.; Labetski, A.; Vitalis, S. CityJSON: A compact and easy-to-use
encoding of the CityGML data model. Open Geospat. Data Softw. Stand. 2019 ,4, 4. [CrossRef]
9. Kutzner, T.; Chaturvedi, K.; Kolbe, T.H. CityGML 3.0: New functions open up new applications. PFG J.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Geoinf. Sci. 2020 , 1–19. [CrossRef]
10. Stadler, A.; Kolbe, T.H. Spatio-Semantic coherence in the integration of 3D city models. In Proceedings of the
5th International ISPRS Symposium on Spatial Data Quality ISSDQ 2007, Enschede, The Netherlands, 13–15
June 2007.
11. Döllner, J.; Kolbe, T.H.; Liecke, F.; Sgouros, T.; Teichmann, K. The virtual 3d city model of berlin-managing,
integrating, and communicating complex urban information. In Proceedings of the 25th International
Symposium on Urban Data Management UDMS 2006, Aalborg, Denmark, 15–17 May 2006.
12. Wagner, D.; Wewetzer, M.; Bogdahn, J.; Alam, N.; Pries, M.; Coors, V . Geometric-Semantical consistency
validation of CityGML models. In Progress and New Trends in 3D Geoinformation Sciences ; Springer:
Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2013; pp. 171–192.
13. Ujang, U.; Anton, F.; Azri, S.; Rahman, A.A.; Mioc, D. 3D hilbert space ﬁlling curves in 3D city modeling for
faster spatial queries. Int. J. 3 D Inf. Model. (IJ3DIM) 2014 ,3, 1–18. [CrossRef]
14. Zlatanova, S.; Van Oosterom, P .; Verbree, E. 3D technology for improving disaster management: Geo-DBMS
and positioning. In Proceedings of the XXth ISPRS Congress, Istanbul, Turkey, 12–23 July 2004.
15. Jobst, M.; Germanchis, T. The employment of 3D in cartography—An overview. In Multimedia Cartography ;
Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2007; pp. 217–228.
16. Ministry of Environment and Urbanization. Bizimsehir Project. Available online: http: //www.bizimsehir.org /
(accessed on 5 May 2020).
17. Intergeo-Simpliﬁed Urban Planning Thanks to 3D Visualisation. Available online: https: //www.intergeo.
de/intergeo-en /newsroom /news /Simpliﬁed-urban-planning-thanks-to-3D-visualisation.php (accessed on
24 June 2020).
18. UVM Systems 3D City Model. Available online: https: //www.uvmsystems.com /index.php /en/projects /proj-
city (accessed on 24 June 2020).
19. Noardo, F.; Arroyo Ohori, K.; Biljecki, F.; Krijnen, T.; Ellul, C.; Harrie, L.; Stoter, J. GeoBIM benchmark 2019:
Design and initial results. In Proceedings of International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
Spatial Information Sciences-ISPRS Archives ; International Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
(ISPRS): Hannover, Germany, 2019; pp. 1339–1346. [CrossRef]
20. Noardo, F.; Biljecki, F.; Agugiaro, G.; Arroyo Ohori, K.; Ellul, C.; Harrie, L.; Stoter, J. GeoBIM benchmark
2019: Intermediate results. In Proceedings of International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
Spatial Information Sciences-ISPRS Archives ; International Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
(ISPRS): Hannover, Germany, 2019; pp. 47–52. [CrossRef]
21. OGC City Geography Markup Language (CityGML) Encoding Standard. Available online: https: //www.ogc.
org/standards /citygml (accessed on 5 May 2020).
22. Zhang, X.; Zhu, Q.; Wang, J. 3D city models based spatial analysis to urban design. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 2004 ,10,
82–86. [CrossRef]
23. Liu, X.; Wang, X.; Wright, G.; Cheng, J.C.; Li, X.; Liu, R. A state-of-the-art review on the integration of
Building Information Modeling (BIM) and Geographic Information System (GIS). ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2017 ,
6, 53. [CrossRef]
24. Herman, L.; ˇRezn ík, T. Web 3D visualization of noise mapping for extended INSPIRE buildings model.
In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Environmental Software Systems, Neusiedl am See,
Austria, 9–11 October 2013. | 22
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 23 of 26
25. Prandi, F.; Devigili, F.; Soave, M.; Di Staso, U.; De Amicis, R. 3D web visualization of huge CityGML models.
Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2015 ,40. [CrossRef]
26. Goetz, M.; Zipf, A. Towards deﬁning a framework for the automatic derivation of 3D CityGML models from
volunteered geographic information. Int. J. 3 D Inf. Model. (IJ3DIM) 2012 ,1, 1–16. [CrossRef]
27. Kaden, R.; Kolbe, T.H. Simulation-based total energy demand estimation of buildings using semantic 3D city
models. Int. J. 3 D Inf. Model. (IJ3DIM) 2014 ,3, 35–53. [CrossRef]
28. Rossmann, J.; Hoppen, M.; Bücken, A. GML-based data management and semantic world modelling for
a 4D forest simulation and information system. In Geospatial Intelligence: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools,
and Applications ; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2019; pp. 423–442.
29. Portal és, C.; Lerma, J.L.; Navarro, S. Augmented reality and photogrammetry: A synergy to visualize
physical and virtual city environments. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2010 ,65, 134–142. [CrossRef]
30. Rau, J.-Y.; Cheng, C.-K. A cost-e ective strategy for multi-scale photo-realistic building modeling and
web-based 3-D GIS applications in real estate. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2013 ,38, 35–44. [CrossRef]
31. Isikdag, U.; Sahin, K. Web based 3D visualisation of time-varying air quality information. Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2018 , 267–274. [CrossRef]
32. Kemec, S.; Duzgun, S.; Zlatanova, S.; Dilmen, D.; Yalciner, A. Selecting 3D urban visualisation models for
disaster management: Fethiye tsunami inundation case. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Cartography and GIS, Nessebar, Bulgaria, 15–20 June 2010.
33. Tezel, D.; Buyukdemircioglu, M.; Kocaman, S. Accurate assessment of protected area boundaries for land
use planning using 3D GIS. Geocarto Int. 2019 , 1–14. [CrossRef]
34. Manferdini, A.; Remondino, F. A review of reality-based 3D model generation, segmentation and web-based
visualization methods. Int. J. Herit. Digit. Era 2012 ,1, 103–123. [CrossRef]
35. Buyukdemircioglu, M.; Kocaman, S. A 3D campus application based on city models and WebGL. Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2018 . [CrossRef]
36. Buyuksalih, G.; Baskaraca, P .; Bayburt, S.; Buyuksalih, I.; Rahman, A.A. 3D city modelling of Istanbul based
on lidar data and panoramic images–issues and challenges. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.
2019 ,42. [CrossRef]
37. Buyukdemircioglu, M.; Kocaman, S.; Isikdag, U. Semi-automatic 3D city model generation from large-format
aerial images. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 339. [CrossRef]
38. Yang, B.; Lee, J. Improving accuracy of automated 3-D building models for smart cities. Int. J. Digit. Earth
2019 ,12, 209–227. [CrossRef]
39. Kocaman, S.; Zhang, L.; Gruen, A.; Poli, D. 3D city modeling from high-resolution satellite images. Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2006 ,36. [CrossRef]
40. Leotta, M.J.; Long, C.; Jacquet, B.; Zins, M.; Lipsa, D.; Shan, J.; Xu, B.; Li, Z.; Zhang, X.; Chang, S.-F. Urban
semantic 3D reconstruction from multiview satellite imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, Long Beach, CA, USA, 16–20 June 2019.
41. Haala, N.; Rothermel, M.; Cavegn, S. Extracting 3D urban models from oblique aerial images. In Proceedings
of the 2015 Joint Urban Remote Sensing Event (JURSE), Lausanne, Switzerland, 30 March–1 April 2015;
pp. 1–4.
42. Feifei, X.; Zongjian, L.; Dezhu, G.; Hua, L. Study on construction of 3D building based on UAV images.
Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2012 ,39, B1.
43. Yi, C.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, Q.; Xu, Y.; Remil, O.; Wei, M.; Wang, J. Urban building reconstruction from raw LiDAR
point data. Comput. Aided Des. 2017 ,93, 1–14. [CrossRef]
44. Zhu, L.; Hyyppä, J.; Kukko, A.; Kaartinen, H.; Chen, R. Photorealistic building reconstruction from mobile
laser scanning data. Remote Sens. 2011 ,3, 1406–1426. [CrossRef]
45. Gruen, A.; Huang, X.; Qin, R.; Du, T.; Fang, W.; Boavida, J.; Oliveira, A. Joint processing of UAV imagery
and terrestrial mobile mapping system data for very high resolution city modeling. Int. Arch. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2013 , 175–182. [CrossRef]
46. Frueh, C.; Zakhor, A. Constructing 3D city models by merging ground-based and airborne views.
In Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Madison, WI, USA, 18–20 June 2003; pp. 2–562. [CrossRef]
47. Ulm, K. Improved 3D city modeling with CyberCity-Modeler (CC-Modeler) using aerial-satellite imagery
and laserscanner data. Int. Arch. Photogram. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2003 ,34, W10. | 23
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 24 of 26
48. Bagheri, H.; Schmitt, M.; Zhu, X. Fusion of multi-sensor-derived heights and OSM-derived building footprints
for urban 3D reconstruction. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2019 ,8, 193. [CrossRef]
49. Parish, Y.I.; Müller, P . Procedural modeling of cities. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 12–17 August 2001; pp. 301–308.
50. Müller, P .; Wonka, P .; Haegler, S.; Ulmer, A.; Van Gool, L. Procedural modeling of buildings. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers ; ACM SIGGRAPH: Boston, MA, USA, 2006; pp. 614–623.
51. Wichmann, A.; Agoub, A.; Kada, M. ROOFN3D: Deep learning training data for 3D building reconstruction.
Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2018 ,42. [CrossRef]
52. Hensel, S.; Goebbels, S.; Kada, M. Facade reconstruction for textured Lod2 Citygml models based on deep
learning and mixed integer linear programming. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2019 ,4.
[CrossRef]
53. Bittner, K.; d’Angelo, P .; Körner, M.; Reinartz, P . Dsm-to-lod2: Spaceborne stereo digital surface model
reﬁnement. Remote Sens. 2018 ,10, 1926. [CrossRef]
54. Kraak, M.-J. Geovisualization illustrated. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2003 ,57, 390–399. [CrossRef]
55. Biljecki, F.; Stoter, J.; Ledoux, H.; Zlatanova, S.; Çöltekin, A. Applications of 3D city models: State of the art
review. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2015 ,4, 2842–2889. [CrossRef]
56. Neuville, R.; Pouliot, J.; Poux, F.; De Rudder, L.; Billen, R. A formalized 3D geovisualization illustrated to
selectivity purpose of virtual 3D city model. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 194. [CrossRef]
57. Auer, M.; Zipf, A. 3D WebGIS: From visualization to analysis. An e cient browser-based 3D line-of-sight
analysis. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 279. [CrossRef]
58. Wendel, J.; Murshed, S.M.; Sriramulu, A.; Nichersu, A. Development of a Web-browser based interface for
3D data—A case study of a plug-in free approach for visualizing energy modelling results. In Progress in
Cartography ; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 185–205.
59. Semmo, A.; Trapp, M.; Jobst, M.; Döllner, J. Cartography-oriented design of 3D geospatial information
visualization–overview and techniques. Cartogr. J. 2015 ,52, 95–106. [CrossRef]
60. Malinverni, E.; Tassetti, A. GIS-based smart cartography using 3D modeling. In Proceedings of the
International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, the ISPRS
8th 3DGeoInfo Conference & WG II /2 Workshop, Istanbul, Turkey, 27–29 November 2013; p. W2. [CrossRef]
61. Herman, L.; ˇReznik, T. 3D Web visualization of environmental information-integration of heterogeneous
data sources when providing navigation and interaction. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci.
2015 ,40. [CrossRef]
62. WebGL Earth—Open Source 3D Digital Globe. Available online: https: //www.khronos.org /webgl /(accessed
on 5 May 2020).
63. CesiumJS—Geospatial 3D Mapping and Virtual Globe Platform. Available online: https: //cesiumjs.org /
(accessed on 5 May 2020).
64. Three.js—JavaScript 3D Library. Available online: https: //threejs.org /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
65. Unity Game Engine. Available online: https: //unity.com /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
66. Blut, C.; Blut, T.; Blankenbach, J. CityGML goes mobile: Application of large 3D CityGML models on
smartphones. Int. J. Digit. Earth 2019 ,12, 25–42. [CrossRef]
67. Buyuksalih, I.; Bayburt, S.; Buyuksalih, G.; Baskaraca, A.; Karim, H.; Rahman, A.A. 3D Modelling and
Visualization Based on the Unity Game Engine–Advantages and Challenges. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2017 ,4, 161. [CrossRef]
68. Walmsley, A.; Kersten, T. Low-Cost development of an interactive, immersive virtual reality experience of
the historic city model Stade 1620. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2019 ,42, 405–411.
[CrossRef]
69. Blaschke, T.; Donert, K.; Gossette, F.; Kienberger, S.; Marani, M.; Qureshi, S.; Tiede, D. Virtual globes: Serving
science and society. Information 2012 ,3, 372–390. [CrossRef]
70. Zhu, L.; Wang, Z.; Li, Z. Representing time-dynamic geospatial objects on virtual globes using CZML—part i:
Overview and key issues. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 97. [CrossRef]
71. Huang, Y.-K. Within skyline query processing in dynamic road networks. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2017 ,6, 137.
[CrossRef] | 24
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 25 of 26
72. Müller, R.D.; Qin, X.; Sandwell, D.T.; Dutkiewicz, A.; Williams, S.E.; Flament, N.; Maus, S.; Seton, M.
The GPlates portal: Cloud-Based interactive 3D visualization of global geophysical and geological data in a
web browser. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0150883. [CrossRef]
73. Google Earth. Available online: https: //www.google.com /earth /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
74. NASA WorldWind. Available online: https: //worldwind.arc.nasa.gov /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
75. iTowns. Available online: http: //www.itowns-project.org /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
76. Liang, J.; Gong, J.; Liu, J.; Zou, Y.; Zhang, J.; Sun, J.; Chen, S. Generating orthorectiﬁed multi-perspective
2.5 D maps to facilitate Web GIS-based visualization and exploitation of massive 3D city models. ISPRS Int.
J. Geo Inf. 2016 ,5, 212. [CrossRef]
77. Gröger, G.; Plümer, L. CityGML—Interoperable semantic 3D city models. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
2012 ,71, 12–33. [CrossRef]
78. Gröger, G.; Kolbe, T.H.; Nagel, C.; Häfele, K.-H. OGC City Geography Markup Language (CityGML) Encoding
Standard ; Open Geospatial Consortium Inc.: Wayland, MA, USA, 2012.
79. Open Geospatial Consortium. Available online: https: //www.ogc.org /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
80. Kolbe, T.H. Representing and exchanging 3D city models with CityGML. In 3D Geo-Information Sciences ;
Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany, 2009; pp. 15–31.
81. COLLADA. Available online: https: //www.khronos.org /collada /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
82. X3D. Available online: http: //www.web3d.org /x3d/what-x3d (accessed on 5 May 2020).
83. 3D Tiles. Available online: https: //github.com /AnalyticalGraphicsInc /3d-tiles (accessed on 5 May 2020).
84. Murshed, S.M.; Al-Hyari, A.M.; Wendel, J.; Ansart, L. Design and implementation of a 4D web application
for analytical visualization of smart city applications. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 276. [CrossRef]
85. Chaturvedi, K.; Yao, Z.; Kolbe, T.H. Web-Based Exploration of and interaction with large and deeply structured
semantic 3D city models using HTML5 and WebGL. In Proceedings of the Bridging Scales-Skalenübergreifende
Nah-und Fernerkundungsmethoden, 35. Wissenschaftlich-Technische Jahrestagung der DGPF, Cologne,
Germany, 16–18 March 2015.
86. Farkas, G. Applicability of open-source web mapping libraries for building massive Web GIS clients.
J. Geogr. Syst. 2017 ,19, 273–295. [CrossRef]
87. Chen, Y.; Shooraj, E.; Rajabifard, A.; Sabri, S. From IFC to 3D tiles: An integrated open-source solution for
visualising BIMs on cesium. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 393. [CrossRef]
88. Resch, B.; Wohlfahrt, R.; Wosniok, C. Web-Based 4D visualization of marine geo-data using WebGL.
Cartogr. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 2014 ,41, 235–247. [CrossRef]
89. Zhu, L.; Sun, J.; Li, C.; Zhang, B. SolidEarth: A new digital Earth system for the modeling and visualization
of the whole Earth space. Front. Earth Sci. 2014 ,8, 524–539. [CrossRef]
90. Ruzinoor, C.M.; Shari , A.R.M.; Pradhan, B.; Rodzi Ahmad, M.; Rahim, M.S.M. A review on 3D terrain
visualization of GIS data: Techniques and software. Geo Spat. Inf. Sci. 2012 ,15, 105–115. [CrossRef]
91. Zhai, R.; Lu, K.; Pan, W.; Dai, S. GPU-Based real-time terrain rendering: Design and implementation.
Neurocomputing 2016 ,171, 1–8. [CrossRef]
92. Larsen, B.D.; Christensen, N.J. Real-Time terrain rendering using smooth hardware optimized level of detail.
J. WSCG 2003 ,11, 1.
93. Dübel, S.; Schumann, H. Visualization of features in 3d terrain. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2017 ,6, 357. [CrossRef]
94. Campos, R.; Quintana, J.; Garcia, R.; Schmitt, T.; Spoelstra, G.; Schaap, D. 3D simpliﬁcation methods and
large scale terrain tiling. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 437. [CrossRef]
95. Staso, U.; Soave, M.; Giori, A. Heterogeneous-Resolution and multi-source terrain builder for CesiumJS
WebGL virtual globe. In Proceedings of the ICVAIV 2016, International Conference on Visual Analytics and
Information Visualisation, Lisbon, Portugal, 19–22 July 2016.
96. Vexcel Imaging UltraCam Falcon. Available online: http: //www.vexcel-imaging.com /ultracam-falcon /
(accessed on 5 May 2020).
97. Agisoft Metashape Professional. Available online: http: //www.agisoft.com /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
98. LAStools. Available online: https: //github.com /LAStools /LAStools /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
99. Trimble Inpho. Available online: https: //geospatial.trimble.com /products-and-solutions /inpho (accessed on
5 May 2020). | 25
Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 2128 26 of 26
100. Frueh, C.; Sammon, R.; Zakhor, A. Automated texture mapping of 3D city models with oblique aerial imagery.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization and Transmission,
2004. 3DPVT 2004, Thessaloniki, Greece, 6–9 September 2004; pp. 396–403.
101. SketchUp: 3D Design Software |3D Modeling on the Web. Available online: https: //www.sketchup.com /
(accessed on 5 May 2020).
102. Autodesk 3ds Max. Available online: https: //www.autodesk.com /products /3ds-max /overview /(accessed on
5 May 2020).
103. Safe Software FME. Available online: https: //www.safe.com /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
104. Julin, A.; Jaalama, K.; Virtanen, J.-P .; Pouke, M.; Ylipulli, J.; Vaaja, M.; Hyyppä, J.; Hyyppä, H. Characterizing
3D city modeling projects: Towards a harmonized interoperable system. ISPRS Int. J. Geo Inf. 2018 ,7, 55.
[CrossRef]
105. VirtualCity Systems Building Reconstruction. Available online: http: //www.virtualcitysystems.de /en/
products /buildingreconstruction (accessed on 5 May 2020).
106. Çevre ve ¸ Sehircilik Bakanlı˘ gı (Ministry of Environment and Urbanization). Bizim ¸ Sehir Gaziantep ˙Ili Pilot Bölge
Çalı¸ sması, Kentsel Tasarım Rehberi ; Ministry of Environment and Urbanization: Ankara, Turkey, 2018; p. 130.
107. The GL Transmission Format (glTF). Available online: https: //www.khronos.org /gltf/(accessed on 5 May 2020).
108. Cesium ION. Available online: https: //cesium.com /cesium-ion /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
109. Heightmap-1.0 Terrain Format. Available online: https: //cesiumjs.org /data-and-assets /terrain /formats /
heightmap-1.0 /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
110. Quantized-Mesh-1.0 Terrain Format. Available online: https: //cesiumjs.org /data-and-assets /terrain /formats /
quantized-mesh-1.0 /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
111. Uploading Data to Ion. Available online: https: //cesium.com /docs/tutorials /uploading /(accessed on
5 May 2020).
112. Braun, J. Aspects on true-orthophoto production. In Proceedings of the 49th Photogrammetric Week,
Stuttgart, Germany, 1–5 September 2013.
113. 3D City Database. Available online: https: //www.3dcitydb.org /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
114. Yao, Z.; Nagel, C.; Kunde, F.; Hudra, G.; Willkomm, P .; Donaubauer, A.; Adolphi, T.; Kolbe, T.H. 3DCityDB-a
3D geodatabase solution for the management, analysis, and visualization of semantic 3D city models based
on CityGML. Open Geospat. Data Softw. Stand. 2018 ,3, 1–26. [CrossRef]
115. 3DCityDB Texture Atlas Creator. Available online: https: //github.com /3dcitydb /texture-atlas-creator
(accessed on 5 May 2020).
116. Draco Compressed Meshes with glTF and 3D Tiles. Available online: https: //cesium.com /blog/2018/04/09/
draco-compression /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
117. Unity Manual—Importing Objects From 3D Studio Max. Available online: https: //docs.unity3d.com /2017.4 /
Documentation /Manual /HOWTO-ImportObjectMax.html (accessed on 5 May 2020).
118. Autodesk FBX—Adaptable File Format for 3D Animation Software. Available online: https: //www.autodesk.
com/products /fbx/overview (accessed on 5 May 2020).
119. HTC Vive. Available online: https: //www.vive.com /eu/(accessed on 5 May 2020).
120. SteamVR. Available online: https: //store.steampowered.com /app/250820 /SteamVR /(accessed on 5 May 2020).
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/). | 26
Journal of Physics: Conference
Series
      
PAPER • OPEN ACCESS
Augmented Reality (AR) based application to
introduce animals for children
To cite this article: N W Marti et al 2020 J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.  1516 012022 
 
View the article online  for updates and enhancements. You may also like 
ARgot: Text-Based Detection Systems In 
Real Time Using Augmented Reality For 
Media Translator Aceh-Indonesia With 
Android-Based Smartphones 
Zalfie Ardian, P. Insap Santoso and Bimo 
Sunarfri Hantono -
A review of physiological and behavioral 
monitoring with digital sensors for 
neuropsychiatric illnesses 
Erik Reinertsen and Gari D Clifford -
Design and Development of Smartphone 
Application Control 
Siti Malihah Mohd Yusof, Munirah Mohd 
Yusof and Hanayanti Hafit -
 
This content was downloaded from IP address 152.58.220.12 on 07/10/2024 at 14:35 | 1
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution
of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI.
Published under licence by IOP Publishing LtdIConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516  (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
1 
 
Augmented Reality (AR) based application to introduce 
animals for children 
N W Marti1, L J E Dewi2, A A J Permana3, and I M Y Ariawan4 
1,2,3,4Informatics Management, Faculty of Engineering a nd Vocational, Ganesha 
University of Education, Singaraja, Indonesia 
Email : wayan.marti@undiksha.ac.id1, joni.erawati@undiksha.ac.id2, 
agus.aan@undiksha.ac.id3, dhi199815@gmail.com4 
Abstract. The development of technology today is very helpful in the multimedia-based learning 
process. Children will be more interested in learning if the application can be installed on a 
Smartphone, because children enjoy playing Smartphones. In teaching children to recognize 
animals, teachers at school use pictures. With the presence of multimedia based on Augmented 
Reality (AR), it is helpful for displaying images of animals in 3-dimensional form so it is more 
interesting. Applications created can help children to classify, explain about animals through 
information about sounds, habitat, breeding about animals in the form of 3D objects. In making 
Augmented Reality Animal Recognition, the researcher adopted the SDLC (System 
Development Life Cycle) method. At the trial stage, the Alpha version of the application was 
carried out to determine the quality, shortcomings and smoothness of the application that had 
been made. Application test results could run well. Therefore, through this application, children 
are more interested in getting to know animals so that it provides a learning experience and is 
easily accessible on smart phones.  
1. Introduction
Technology develops rapidly. It affects the education positively; especially multimedia applications that 
provide useful information that can be accessed easily by children. Equipping children with enough 
prior-knowledge is important basis for them to expend their knowledge. Before signing -in elementary 
school, children must be able to engage in verbal and nonverbal communication. Verbal communication 
is defined as the form of communication that includes writing and oral speaking. While non-verbal 
communication is defined as conveying information or messages to others without using words, rather 
conveying them by using body movements [1]. In teaching and learning practice, most teachers when 
explaining material used verbal communication with the help of paintings, drawings or posters, and 
books. Those helping tools were wasting large amount of paper and ink.   
Early introduction of the size and the shape of the animal will help Children to develop better 
understanding about the animals. Based on this idea, it is necessary to develop media that can be used 
for introducing animals to children at schools. The technology for this specific purpose is Augmented 
Reality (AR). Augmented Reality Animal Recognition provides children with materials about the shape 
of the animal, the habitat of the animals, and the original sound of the animals. Learning animals is like 
learning letters or alphabets in which children must understand the shape of the letters first. During their 
learning process, children do not only learn from books, posters or pictures hanged on the classroom 
wall but also from the AR-based learning media which helps children to understand animals easily. | 2
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
2 
 
 
 
 
 
Besides, the AR assisted learning is interesting an d fascinating and children love it. AR technology h as 
been used for developing animal-recognition magic b ook for kindergarten. The magic book is Android-
based application using three-dimensional object ma rkers [2] . Reference [3]  also developed learning 
media to introduce theme called curriculum for earl y preschool children.  
AR incorporates two or three-dimensional virtual ob jects into real objects. The advantage of AR is 
its extensive implementation. It can be implemented  in various media, for example: the introduction of  
batik motifs using augmented reality [4] . Its advantage makes the AR a good technology for developing 
interesting learning media. The implementation of A R-based learning Media is not expensive because 
the learning media is developed with open source ap plications. The application only requires computer 
or smartphone. The purpose of developing AR-based l earning media is to give children different 
learning experience utilizing existing technology. The learning will be more interesting and realistic  for 
children. 
2.  Method 
2.1.  Data Collection 
The research method was a scientific method to obta in data which had specific purposes and usage [11] . 
The research was conducted at kindergarten in Gerok gak District. The research starts from November 
2018 to June 2019. Data collection was conducted fo r 3 months that included searching for information,  
data, or information that aimed achieving the objec tives of the application or system made. In develop ing 
the AR-based Animal Recognition application, litera ture review method was also. The Literature 
Review Method is a list of references from various types of books, journals or the internet and others  
sources that are subsequently quoted and written in  the proposal. In this research, the process of fin ding 
data or information was done through books and the internet. Another method used was direct interviews  
with kindergarten teachers to get input for the dev elopment of this project. 
2.2.  Application development 
The method used in developing software was SDLC. Th e System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) 
method was a classic method to develop, maintain, a nd implement it on the system or application [10]. 
This method had an important role in developing sys tems and applications to ensure strong management 
and maximize productivity. The general stages of th e development are Planning, Analysis, Designing, 
Implementation, Testing, and Maintaining. The SDLC method can be seen on Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  SDLC Method. | 3
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Flowchart of operate the application 
 
 Planning 
This was initial development process of AR-based An imal Recognition application. Currently 
learning media for introducing animals was still la id upon the use of posters and flash card. The AR-
based application Animal recognition was made based  on the needs of the user therefore the 
application was motivating and interesting. Users c an observe 3D objects, listen to information, or 
observe information that had been provided and can also listen to animal sounds. There were 6 
animals displayed. This application retrieved data about animals from internet sources, books, and 
also magazines that were used as a support for the application of AR-based animal recognition 
application. 
 
 Analysis  
Analysis was a stage for collecting data to get inf ormation about the shape of animal, clear 
information about the animal and coding preparation . The workflow of this application was displayed 
on the flowchart diagram explaining the features of  the AR-based animal recognition application. 
See Figure 2. 
 
 Design (modeling) 
The modeling phase was done by creating the interfa ce design based on the pre-designed model. 
Photoshop Cs6 software was used to design backgroun d in the main interface, 3D Blender was used 
to create 3D objects that would be displayed on the  AR-based Animal Recognition application.  
The process of designing the application included i nterface design process. This design was 
necessary to make the application interesting and a ttractive for the user and also provided an 
overview of the application regarding the implement ation and interface of the developed application 
such as the main menu and buttons used in applicati ons such as start, guide, and exit buttons. The 
content design was done by creating storyboards. St oryboard was used as an overview of the stages 
and processes that occurred in the AR-based Animal Recognition application | 4
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 Implementation (Evaluation) 
This stage focused on implementing the design conce pts that had been made previously into 
applications that were ready to be used by users. T he application can be used by users to find out 
bugs in the menu and also find errors in coding. 
 
 Testing  
At this stage, the AR-based Animal Recognition appl ication was tested after fixing error. Observing 
the results was also conducted and executing data t o be tested in order to ensure deficiencies or bugs  
that could prevent users from using the application . 
 
 Publication 
At this stage, the AR-based Animal Recognition appl ication would be installed and used in several 
Smartphone with different specifications in order t o identify the Smartphone specifications 
supporting this application and also to find out bu gs and identify which application supporting the 
Smartphone with less specifications. Maintenance mu st be done to fix the bugs and errors that were 
not found in the previous stages. 
2.3.  Augmented Reality (AR) 
Augmented Reality or known as AR is a technology th at combines two-dimensional or three-
dimensional virtual objects into a real three-dimen sional environment and then launches these virtual 
objects into real time [5] . Augmented Reality Research aimed at developing te chnology that allowed 
real-time integration of digital content created by  computers with the real world, Augmented Reality 
allowed users to see two-dimensional or three-dimen sional virtual objects projected on the real world 
[6] . 
Virtual objects provide full information for users to develop better understanding of something. The 
AR technology simplifies the real object by transfo rming it into virtual objects, so information can b e 
used not only by the direct users but also by each user who are connected with real objects. The AR is  
principally similar to Virtual Reality which is rea l-time. Virtual Reality displays object along with its 
surrounding environment, whereas Augmented Reality combines an object into reality. The animal used 
in the development of AR-based animal recognition w as limited. There were 3 herbivorous animals, 3 
carnivorous animals, namely: Zebra, Giraffe, Cows, Bear, Komodo, and Cheetah. 
2.4.  Unity 
Unity is a software for developing game which allow s developers to create a 3D game easily and quickly . 
Unity can also be used to develop real-time 3D game . Unity has long been used to develop the following  
games: (1) First Person Shooting (FPS), (2) Role Pl aying Game (RPG), and (3) Real Time Strategy 
(RTS) games. Besides, Unity is also a multiplatform  software. Multiplatform software is an application  
that can be applicant to various file type formats,  such as: exe, apk, and others, which allows us to 
publish like Windows, Mac, Android, IOS, PS3 [7] . 
Unity is the best game editor as its editor feature  developed with simple interface. Unity is suitable  
for the game developers who cannot buy game engine license or develop their own game engine. Unity 
helps the developers to create 3D games, 2D games, and even online games. Other valuable features 
available on the application are creating 2D / 3D g ames, developing Augmented Reality, and creating 
online games.  The Unity supports the file conversi on into: Mobile Android, I phone, Windows, Linux, 
Flash, Web player, Google Play online publish, Andr oid market that can be sold. Unity also supports 
various file extension such as 3ds, obj, and fbx. U nity cannot be used to design object or modeling 
because the software is not equipped with design to ol. If developers want to design or modeling multip le 
objects they can use other software 3dsmax or blend er. But there are many interesting feature that mak e 
the software worth studying. | 5
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
5 
 
 
 
 
 
2.5.  Vuforia Qualcomm 
Vuforia is an application developed by Qualcomm to support the game development that uses 
Augmented Reality technology. Vuforia simplifies th e game development because the library and its 
core functions are readily available. The developer s only need to explore their imagination and develo p 
appealing application. Vuforia uses Vision Computer  technology to recognize and track markers or 
target images and simple 3D objects such as boxes i n real-time [8] . 
Vuforia is SDK (Software Development Kit) developed  by Qualcomm to support the game 
development that uses Augmented Reality technology.  By using Vuforia, developers do not need to 
worry about the image processing in developing Augm ented Reality applications. But Vuforia cannot 
recognize objects in real time and technically ther e is no other software that supports Vuforia. There fore, 
Vuforia is not free for production but it can be us ed freely for the development stage which means the  
developer can use features freely.  
The SDK has interesting features such as objects, t ext scanning, frames recognizer, virtual buttons, 
object surfaces identification, clouds-based scanni ng, target images recognizer, cylindrical targets 
recognizer, and recognizing objects that have alrea dy been targeted. The utilization of Vuforia has 
increased significantly to integrate the capabiliti es of the Augmented Reality feature. 
2.6.  Blender 3D  
Blender is an open source software normally used on  3D graphics computer software to create 3D 
modeling objects, produce animated films, build vis ual effects, create interactive 3D applications, an d 
video games. Open source 3D programs and animations  can be freely used, developed and redistributed. 
Blender objects can be published freely and for com mercial use. Blender has official support for 
Microsoft Windows, MacOS X, and Linux [9] . 
Blender is open source software where users can inv est, participate, and help to update powerful 
collaboration tools. The software was specifically designed to create 3D multimedia content which has 
numerous advantages, namely: it is open source wher e users can freely modify 3D objects as long as 
they do not violate the General Public License, it is multiplatform which means that blender is availa ble 
in various OS, for example Linux, Mac, and Windows,  it is also a free software because its extraordina ry 
features can be updated and developed to become bet ter application. 
The use of Blender is widely documented on its site . Support for the users is also available through 
community tutorials and internet discussion forums.  Professional support is also provided by Blender 
network which contains support and social services for professional blenders. 
2.7.   Animal 
Animals are living organisms classified into Animal ia or metazoan. Animals are classified based on 
their respective characteristics, from physical cha racteristics, food, habitat, and others. Animals in clude 
multicellular organism and organized themselves wit h different functions. From the type of food, 
animals can be grouped into three different types, namely: Carnivorous Animals, Herbivorous Animals 
and Omnivorous Animals. 
 
2.7.1.  Herbivorous Animals.  Herbivore animals are plant-eating animals. These plant-eating animals  
are not dangerous. Herbivore animals have molars to  grind green plants soft mold and incisors to cut 
green plants. Herbivore animals also have canine te eth as protection tools. The herbivore animals are 
viviparous and mammals animal, land-based animal, q uadrupeds, and warm-blooded animals. The 
herbivorous animals live in groups in order to prot ect themselves from predators. By living in groups,  
herbivore animals can protect each group members wh en predators attack. There are various kinds of 
herbivore animal. They are normally part of human l ife. | 6
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
6 
 
 
 
 
 
2.7.2.  Carnivore Animals. Carnivore animals are meat-eating animals, both fre es meat and carcasses.  
The meat is from fish, reptiles, birds or others. C arnivore animals refer to vertebrate animals and 
invertebrate animals. The vertebrate animals are ti gers, lions, and dragons. The invertebrate animals are 
ground snails and squid. In general, carnivorous an imals have sharp claws that are used to hunt its pr ey.  
Predominant physical characteristics of the carnivo rous animals are having strong jaws and teeth. 
These allow tem kill larger prey. Some of carnivore  animals produce poisons to awaken and paralyze 
their prey. Carnivore animals have sharp eyes and t hey are also fast runner. The sharp eyes enable the m 
to spot the prey from a long distance. Some of the carnivore animals are marsupials such as Tasmania, 
predator birds such as eagles and owls, vultures su ch as crows, vultures, weasels, snakes, seagulls, 
penguins, pelicans, octopus and squid. 
 
  
Figure 3.  Main Menu Application. Figure 4.  User guide. 
 
Figure 5.  Object display when the marker is detected. 
 
3.  Result and Discussion 
Hardware specifications suitable for the process of  application development are the Intel (R) Core (TM ) 
Processor i3-4005U CPU @ 1.70GHz, installed memory (RAM) 2.00 GB and the Windows 10 operating 
system. The application used for developing the AR was Unity 3D used for combining libraries from 
Vuforia. Photoshop Cs6 application was for backgrou nd editing. Blender 3D application was for 
creating objects as well as creating rigging in the  AR-based Animal Recognition application. 
Marker card was employed in the usage of the applic ation. The smartphone was brought close to a 
marker that has been determined so that it could be  read on the application. The marker used should be | 7
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
7 
 
 
 
 
 
a clean image so that the image could be easily det ected by the application. If the marker used is not  
good, the application will fail to detect and 3-dim ensional images will not appear. 
The application is easy to use. The users turn on t he AR camera then an object will automatically 
appear based on the predetermined marker. Then the 3-dimensional object will appear on the 
smartphone. The marker identification process is ta ken from a database that has been created by Vufori a 
library that contains marker images used to identif y images on the marker. The main interface of this 
application can be seen as Figure 3, instructions o n how to use the application on Bahasa Indonesian 
can be seen on Figure 4. The image of an animal obj ect, description, and sound are presented on Figure  
5. The process of how the application works can be seen as in Figure 6. Applications that have been 
produced can be used to introduce animals based on animal types, namely carnivores and herbivores. In 
addition, children can listen directly to the sound  of animals, as well as other information for examp le 
related to the animal's habitat. This research has similarities with AR-based applications that have b een 
developed that take the theme of animals. The diffe rence is in the classification of animals, while th ere 
are other studies that make AR in the form of Magic  Book [2] and some even specifically make AR for 
animals in Indonesia that are difficult to start ex tinct [12]. 
The next stage was to test the applications. The te sting consists of two stages, namely application 
testing and device testing. Application testing was  done by testing the parts such as marker size, ang le, 
menu features, and lighting. Device testing was don e by applying the application scenario on different  
types of smartphone, presented on Table 1.  
 
 
Figure 6.  How the application works. 
Table 1.  Device Testing. 
No. Testing Result 
1. Marker Size (Large 100 % - 50 %)  3D-object Appear 
Marker Size Testing (Medium 50%-25%) 3D-object Appe ar 
Marker Testing (Small 25% - 0%) 3D-object disappear  
2. Angle Testing (0º - 30º) 3D-object disappear 
Angle Testing (30º - 60º) 3D-object Appear but inap propriate 
position  
Angle Testing (60º - 90º) 3D-object Appear 
3. Menu Feature (Opening Main menu) Running smoothly w ithout error  
Menu Feature (Opening User Guide) Running smoothly without error  
Menu Feature (Select play  button sound on the AR 
Camera) Running smoothly without error  
4. Lighting(outdoor at noon) 3D-object Appear 
Lighting (indoor with turned on lamp) 3D-object App ear | 8
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
8 
 
 
 
 
 
Lighting (indoor with turned off lamp) 
 3D-object Appear 
5. Android Smartphone  Brand  
(XIAOMI Note 5A Prime 
Qualcomm MSM8940 Snapdragon 435, RAM 3 GB) 
 Running smoothly  
Android Smartphone  Brand 
(OPPO F1Plus, Eight Core, RAM 4 GB) 
 Running smoothly 
Android Smartphone  Brand 
(VIVO V5, MediaTek MT6750, RAM 4 GB) 
 Running smoothly 
Android Smartphone  Brand 
(OPPO A37, Snapdragon 410 Soc, RAM 2 GB) Running smoothly 
4.  Conclusion 
The AR-based Animal Recognition application designe d using the SDLC method has been successfully 
developed. The development of AR-based Animal Recog nition application also used Unity 3D 
application, libraries from Vuforia, Blender 3D, an d Photoshop CS6. The main components of the 
application are menus on the main page such as Star t, Guide and Exit. If the user clicks the start men u 
then the application will directly point to the AR Camera. If the user chooses the guide menu, the 
application will direct the user to the instruction  of using the application. If the users want to end  the 
application, they can click the exit menu. The appl ication interesting features of the application inc ludes 
3D models display, animation, and oral description of the animals on Augmented Reality. The 
application has been tasted and the result was prom ising. The application could run well matching the 
interface and storyboard design. This application c an be used to introduce animals in a fascinating an d 
interesting way because it offers moving animals wi th their actual sound. Th 3D models and animations 
on the application were herbivore and carnivore ani mals such as Zebra, Cow, Bear, Komodo, Cheetah, 
and Giraffe. 
References 
[1]  Kusumawati T I 2016 Komunikasi Verbal dan Non Verba l Jurnal AL- IRSYAD  vol 4 no 2 (in 
 Indonesian) 
[2]  Dhiyatmika  I D 2015 Aplikasi Augmented Reality Mag ic Book Pengenalan Binatang Untuk 
 Siswa TK  Lontar Komputer  vol 6 p.120-127 (in Indonesian) 
[3]  Sarunia  N 2016 Pengembangan Media Pembelajaran Unt uk Anak Usia Dini Menggunakan 
 Augmented Reality Jurnal Iptek  vol 20  no  1 p.95-108 (in Indonesian) 
[4]  Fernando M 2014 Aplikasi Augmented Reality Sebagai Media Pengenalan  Batik Nusantara 
 Berbasis Android  Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta, ( Preprint   Theses) (in Indonesian) 
[5]  Martono K T 2011) Augmented Reality Sebagai Metafor a Baru dalam Teknologi Interaksi 
 Manusia dan Komputer Sistem Komputer   vol 1, no 2 (in Indonesian)  
[6]  Haller, Billinghurst dan Thomaz 2007 Pengertian Augmented Reality (AR)  https://www.it-
 jurnal.com/pengertian-augmented-realityar/ 
[7]  Goldstone W 2009 Unity Game Development Essentials  (Birmingham: Packt Publishing Ltd. ) 
[8]  Fanthoni M 2012 Alat Musik Perkusi Augmented Reality Bebasis Androi d  (Malang : Universitas 
 Muhammadiyah (in Indonesian) 
[9]  Gunadarma 2009 Modul Blender 3D  (Jakarta : Universitas gunadarma)  
[10]  Hidayatullah R 2010 Pengertian SDLC dan Tahapannya  Jurnal Academia  vol 5 no 2 
[11]  Sugiyono 2004 Metode Penelitian Jurnal Alfabeta  vol 7 no 3 | 9
IConVET 2019
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1516 (2020) 012022IOP Publishing
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1516/1/012022
9 
 
 
 
 
 
[12]  Artdias H, Sanjawa R and Widiantoro A D Y Rare Anim al Education Usingaugmented Reality 
 Sisforma  Journal  vol 4 no  2 p. 52–58 | 10
79 
USABILITY ANALYSIS ON THE ENDANGERED INDONESIAN ANIMALS 
AND PLANTS AUGMENTED REALITY APPLICATION   
 
Putri Syifa Darmawel  
 
Master of  Business Information Systems  
Technology and Engineering  Master Program  
Gunadarma  University  
www.guna darma.ac.id  
putrisyifad@gmail.com  
 
Abstract — Knowledge about Indonesian 
endangered animals and plants has been taught at 
elementary school, but still based on text. In 
curriculum 2013, teachers are expected to be able to 
develop creative ideas su ch as using interactive 
learning media that makes learning fun for students. 
Interactive learning media can be used as a solution 
to make the learning process more interesting. The 
use of augmented reality technology can be 
implemented on interactive learn ing media that 
aims to increase elementary school children's 
interest and make the learning process easier for the 
teacher. This research uses a descriptive 
quantitative method by distributing questionnaires 
to test the HEBULA Application which is an 
inter active learning media for introducing 
endangered Indonesian animals and plants using 
augmented reality technology for elementary school 
children. Testing is done by using the User 
Acceptance Test (UAT). This research aims to find 
out whether the HEBULA App lication can be well 
received and effectively used as a learning media. 
The results of this research show that HEBULA 
Application is suitable to be used as a learning 
media which is shown by the percentage of UAT 
eligibility of 92,6% that can be categorize d as very 
well.  
 
Keywords  : interactive learning media, augmented 
reality, endangered In donesian animals and plants, 
user acceptance test  
 
Abstrak— Pengetahuan tentang hewan dan 
tumbuhan langka di Indonesia diperkenalkan sejak 
berada di Sekolah Dasar (SD) , namun 
pembelajaran masih terbatas teks. Pada Kurikulum 
2013 guru diharapkan untuk mengembangkan ide -
ide kreatif seperti menggunakan media 
pembelajaran interaktif yang dapat menarik minat 
belajar anak. Media pembelajaran interaktif dapat 
digunakan sebagai  solusi untuk membuat proses 
pembelajaran menjadi lebih menarik. Penggunaan 
teknologi Augmented Reality dapat 
diimplementasikan pada media pembelajaran 
interaktif dengan harapan dapat meningkatkan 
minat belajar anak SD dan mempermudah guru dalam proses pem belajaran. Penelitian ini 
menggunakan metode kuantitatif deskriptif dengan 
men yebarkan kuesioner untuk melakukan uji  coba  
pada  Aplikasi HEBULA yang merupakan media 
pembelajaran interaktif dalam pengenalan hewan 
dan tumbuhan langka di Indonesia dengan 
mengg unakan teknologi AR untuk anak SD. 
Pengujian  yang dilakukan yaitu pengujian usability 
dengan menggunakan  menggunakan User 
Acceptance Test  (UAT). Hal ini dilakukan untuk 
mengetahui apakah Aplikasi HEBULA dapat 
diterima dengan baik dan efektif digunakan 
seba gai media pembelajaran. Hasil dari penelitian 
menunjukan bahwa Aplikasi HEBULA layak untuk 
dijadikan sebagai media pembelajaran  yang 
ditunjukan oleh presentase kelayakan UAT sebesar 
92,6% yang dapat  dikategorikan dengan sangat 
baik.  
 
Kata Kunci : media pem belajaran interaktif , 
augmented reality, hewan da n tumbuhan langka 
Indonesia, user acceptance test  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Knowledge about endangered  animals and 
plants in Indonesia has been introduced from an 
early age, this can be seen from the existence of 
learn ing materials for the preservation of living 
things in schools, especially at the elementary 
school  (Sembiring, Wahyuni, & Anurogo, 2018) . 
The intro duction of endangered  animals a nd plants 
in Indonesia to children  aims to form the idea that 
endangered  animals  and plants need to be 
protected  and preserved to avoid extinction. The 
learning me thod currently used is curriculum  
2013. The curriculum  2013  for elementary school  
uses a them atic learning approach  (Suraya, 2014) . 
Teachers are expected to be able to develop further 
creative ideas by utilizing alternative activities 
offered in the teacher manual  (Kemdikbud, 2017) , 
or develop their learning ideas, such as interactive 
learning media where learning methods combine 
fun and learning  (Irfansyah, 2017) . The problem 
that often occurs now is the absence of media that 
can attract children and the use of pictorial paper | 1
80 
 
media is not enough to stimulate their minds, 
feelings and , hearts  (Hidayat & Setiyadi, 2017) .  
Interactive multimedia is a media equipped 
with a controller tha t can be operated by the user, 
so that users can choose what they want  (Wibowo, 
2012)  for the next process, such as interactive 
learning and game applications, while learning is 
defined as the process of creating an enabling 
environment  (Sutisna & Hikmah, 2 018)   the 
learning process occurs  (Dewi, Isnanto, & Martono, 
2015) . One of the objectives of learning with 
interactive multime dia is to replace and or 
complement and support the elements of  
objectives, materials, methods  (Devayana, 2017) , 
and assessment tools that exist in the teaching and 
learning process in conventional education 
systems that are commonly   used  (Dewi et al., 
2015) , (Lubis, Ritonga, Hia, & Nasution, 2020) . 
Learning using interactive multimedia can be a 
solution to increase children's interest in the 
learning process  (Hamidi, 2018) . In his research, 
the creation of interactive learning media for 
Islamic religious education was made to support 
the implementation of the c urriculum  2013. In this 
research,  it can be concluded that interactive 
learning media c an suppor t the implementation of 
the c urriculum 2013 and is suitable for use as a 
learning resource for seventh -grade  students.  
Augmented Reality (AR)  can be regarded as 
a technology that integrates computer -generated 
object s and virtual content into the real world, 
thereby it can improve  (Kamphuis, Barsom, 
Schijven, & Christoph, 2014)  the perception of 
reality  (Thomas, Linder, Harper, Blyth, & Yee, 
2019)  . This technology can  make an object that is 
initial ly flat or two -dimensional (2D)  as if it 
becomes real and blends with the surrounding 
environment.      The use of AR technology can be 
utilized  in the learning of endangered  animals an d 
plants at the elementary school  which can b e 
adjusted to the method in the  curriculum  2013 
learning.  The advantages posse ssed by AR are 
more interactive  so that the applicati on of the 
concepts used can increase one's reasoning power 
and imagination (Dhiyatmika, Putra, & Mandenni, 
2015) . The creation of three -dimensional (3D) 
objects and their shapes which are the combination 
of real and virtual objects can increase children's 
inte rest in learning more about the material. The 
application of the AR concept to the learning 
method can create a more real learning 
atmosphere  (Kamiana, Made, & Gede, 2019 ).  
Similar research was conducted on the 
analysis of the use of logical algebraic interactive 
learning media using the User Acceptance Test 
(UAT)  (Agustina & Suprianto, 2018) . The results of 
this research , namely 86% of respondents stated 
that they agreed that interactive learning media were very useful and easy to use which were 
considered appropriate   (Agustina & Suprianto, 
2018)  with learning needs and were declared 
feasible to be developed again. Other research 
concerns interactive learning media using AR   
(Feoh & Cris tyadi, 2018) . This  research  states that 
learning using AR is very feasible to be used in 
helping teachers explain and increase student 
interest. Based on the UAT test results obtained, 
the feasibility percentage was 88.74% which can 
be categorized as very  good feasibility.   
This research  aims to  analyze the use of the 
HEBULA A pplic ation which is a learning media for 
endangered  animals and plants in Indonesia using 
Augmented Reality (AR) for elementary school 
children using usability testing. The method use d is 
the User Acceptance Test (UAT). This is done to 
determine the benefits of implementing interactive 
learning media for elementary school children. 
Whether using this application can increase the 
effectiveness in the learning process and can be 
well rec eived by users.  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 
The research flow  can be seen in the 
diagram, as in Figure 1.  
 
 
Source  : (Agustina & Suprianto, 2018)  
Figure  1. Research Framework  
 
Figure 1. is the re search framework . The 
first stage is the problem identification stage. The 
second stage is a literature revie w. The usability 
testing using the User Acceptance Test (UAT) 
method. At this stage, the researcher distributes 
questionnaires to target users. The next stage is 
usability testing analysis, which consists of a recap 
of the results of filling out the questi onnaire and 
calculating UAT. After the results of the UAT are 
obtained, the final stage is to conclude the use of | 2
81 
AR-based learning media for endangered animals 
and plants in Indonesia in elementary school 
children.  
The data collection technique used in th is 
research is descriptive quantitative. The data was 
collected by distributing questionnaires. The object 
of this research is the HEBULA A pplication which is 
an interactive learning media application about 
endangered animals and plants in Indonesia using 
AR which is focused on elementary school children.  
The UAT test is based on two criteria. The 
aspects used are display  and functional. The 
display aspect aims to determine whether the 
display  of the application is by the purpose and can 
be attractive to t he user, while the functional  
aspect aims to determine whether the application 
is running well and is useful for the user.  
The questionnaire was distributed to ten 
respondents starting from grade first to sixth 
grade. The questionnaire consisted of ten 
statements consisting of five statements regarding 
display aspects and five statements re garding 
aspects of functional . The questionnaire was 
created using a Likert scale assessment consisting 
of five levels of assess ment, namely Strongly Agree  
(SA) , Agree  (A), Neutral  (N), Disag ree (D), and 
Strongly Disagree  (SD)  as well as in the Indonesian 
Language can be referred as Sangat Setuju  (SS), 
Setuju  (S), Netral  (N), Tidak Setuju (TS) , and Sangat 
Tidak Setuju  (STS) . Each assessment has a different 
weight.  
From the results of this test, results will be 
obtained that can be used to analyze the suitability 
of the system that has been designed with user 
needs, e specially in terms of display and 
functional ity. This test will show whether the 
application can run well and the results of the level 
of user satisfaction with the application.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 
User Interface  Design  
The display of the HEBULA A pplication can 
be seen in the following image:  
 
 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
Figure  2. Display of Splash Screen   
Figure 2. is the display of the HEBULA splash 
screen. This display will appear when the user 
opens the Application. In the HEBULA splash 
screen, there is the name of t he application that is 
'HEBULA' which stands for 'Hewan dan Tumbuhan 
Langka Indonesia' which means Indonesian 
endangered animals and plants.  
 
 
Source  : (Darmawel, 201 9) 
Figure  3. Display of Main Menu  
 
Figure 3. is the display of the main menu. 
There are four menus in this a pplication consist of 
AR camera s, materials, games, and quiz. The button 
with the yellow 'i' symbol on the top left is a guide 
for using the AR ca mera, while the red button with 
the exit symbol on the bottom right is a button that 
allows users to exit the application.  
 
 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
Figure 4. Disp lay of 3D Object Selection  
 
Figure 4. is the display when the user selects 
the 'AR camera' menu which is a 3D object 
selection page. Objects that can be seen by users 
are divided into two, namely endangered animals 
and plants. The endangered animal's objec ts 
consist of the Sumatran Elephant, Javan 
Rhinoceros, Green Sea Turtle, and Sumatran Tiger. | 3
82 
 
Endangered plant objects consist of Rafflesia 
Arnoldi, Titan Arum, and Tropical Pitcher Plant.  
 
 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
Figure  5. Display of  Endangered Animal Javan 
Rhinoceros AR  
 
Figure 5. is one of the displays of the AR 
camera, which is the Javan Rhinoceros Object. 
Objects can appear by using a marker. Users can 
freely c hoose and use markers according to the 
criteria described in the application usage guide on 
the main menu. Users can use the AR feature by 
pointing the camera at the marker then pressing 
the camera button in the lower right corner then 
the object will appe ar as shown in Figure 5. In this 
menu, there is a feature to listen to the sound of an 
object and an info button to view information 
according to the selected object.  
 
 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
Figure  6. Display of Learning Material  
 
Figure 6. is the display of the learning 
material menu. Users can read materials related to 
endangered animals and plants that are adapted to 
objects on the AR camera menu. The material in 
the learning material menu can be read first before 
the user answers the quiz on the quiz menu.  
  
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
Figure 7. Display of Quiz  
 
Figure 7. i s the display o f the quiz menu. Ten 
questions  must be answered by the user. The 
answer type is a multiple -choice consisting of 4 
answer choices. The score can be seen on the upper 
right side of the page.  
 
 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
Figure  8. Display of  HEBULA Memory  Game  Level 1  
 
Figure 8. is the display of the game menu. 
the game is called the HEBULA memory game 
which is a game to match cards with images of 
endangered  Indonesian animals and plants. There 
are 5 levels in the HEBULA memory game. Figure 8. 
is an example of level 1. The higher the level, the 
more the number of cards.  
 
User Acceptance Test (UAT)  
At this stage, the respondents carry out the 
implementation an d testing of the application. 
Respondents were asked to fill out a questionnaire 
consisting of statements relating to the features 
contained in the application. The respondents who 
are elementary school students will fill out a 
questio nnaire after trying t he HEBULA A pplication.  
 
UAT  Analysis  
The UAT used a Likert scale as the level of 
assessment. The questionnaire consists of 10 | 4
83 
statements consisting of display  and functional 
aspects that related to the HEBULA Application. 
Table 1. is the UAT questionnaire  distributed to 
respondents. Table 2. represents the processing 
results taken from the questionnaire data that has 
been filled in by the respondent.  
 
Table  1. UAT  Questionnaire  
No Question s SA A N D SD 
Display  
1 The layout of the 
buttons in the 
applicat ion are 
arranged according to 
their place  6 4 0 0 0 
2 The texts on the 
application can be 
seen clearly  8 2 0 0 0 
3 The display of the 
Hebula application is 
interesting  5 3 2 0 0 
4 The menus contained 
in the application is 
quite complete  5 5 0 0 0 
5 The features contained 
in the application are 
interesting  6 3 1 0 0 
Functional   
6 The buttons contained 
in the application 
function properly  7 2 1 0 0 
7 The augmented reality 
feature of endangered 
animals and plants in 
Indonesia helps in the 
learning proce ss in 
schools  9 1 0 0 0 
8 The application makes 
it easier for users to 
learn endangered 
animals and plants in 
Indonesia  5 5 0 0 0 
9 The features contained 
in the application are 
easy to use  8 2 0 0 0 
10 The performance of 
the application 
provides a fast  
response  8 2 0 0 0 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
 
Table  2. Results of Questionnaire Data Processing  
No Questions  SA A N D SD TO-
TAL  
Display  
1 The layout of 
the button s in 
the application 
are arranged 
according to 
their place  6 4 0 0 0 10 
2 The texts on 8 2 0 0 0 10 No Questions  SA A N D SD TO-
TAL  
the application 
can be seen 
clearly  
3 The display of 
the Hebula 
application is 
interesting  5 3 2 0 0 10 
4 The menus 
contained in 
the application 
is quite  
complete  5 5 0 0 0 10 
5 The features 
contained in 
the application 
are interesting  6 3 1 0 0 10 
Functional  
6 The buttons 
contained in 
the application 
function 
properly  7 2 1 0 0 10 
7 The 
augmented 
reality feature 
of endangered 
animals and 
plants in 
Indonesia 
helps in the 
learning 
process in 
schools  9 1 0 0 0 10 
8 The 
application 
makes it 
easier for 
users to learn 
endangered 
animals and 
plants in 
Indonesia  5 5 0 0 0 10 
9 The features 
contained in 
the application 
are easy to use  8 2 0 0 0 10 
10 The 
performance 
of the 
application 
provides a fast 
response  8 2 0 0 0 10 
TOTAL  67 29 4 0 0 100  
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
 
 The answer to each statement has a 
different wei ght value. The following Table 3 . is the 
rating point of each answer: | 5
84 
 
Table 3. Rating Point  
Agreement  Point  
Strongly Disagree  1 
Disagree  2 
Neutral  3 
Agree  4 
Strongly Agree  5 
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
 
Based on the results of the questionnaire 
data processing in Table 2. The following is a 
description of the calculation of the questionnaire 
data processing:  
1. Strongly Agree , was obtained 67 answers from 
respondents . The calculation can be shown on 
the equation below:  
𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑦  𝐴𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒 =67 ×5  =335  𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  
 
2. Agree , was obtained 29 answers from 
respondents. The calculation can be shown on 
the equation below:  
𝐴𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒 =29 ×4  =116   𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  
 
3. Neutral, was obtained 4 answers from 
respondents. The calculation c an be shown on 
the equation below  
𝑁𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙 =4 ×3  =12 𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛  
 
4. Disagree and  Strongly Disagree , was obtained 0 
answers from respondents.  
The frequency of data (f) calculations can be shown 
on the equation below:  
 
𝑓 =𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  (𝑆𝐴)+𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  (𝐴)+𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  (𝑁)+
𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  (𝐷)+𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  (𝑆𝐷)   ................................ .................  (1) 
  
=335  +116 +12  
=463  𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  
 
The calculation of the number of samples 
processed (N) can be shown in the equation below:  
𝑁 = 𝐻𝑖𝑔 ℎ𝑒𝑠𝑡 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡  ×𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑠   ..(2) 
𝑁 =5 ×100 =500  
 
The formula to get the Interval (I) is shown in the 
equation below:  
𝐼 =100
Total  Score  (Likert )  ................................ ..............  (3) 
𝐼 =100
5=20%   
 
The interval is used to determine the rating scale. 
The interval used is 20% starting from the lowest 
distanc e of 0% to the highest of 100%, T able 4 . 
below is the rating scale used:  
 
 
 
 Table 4. Interpretation of Score After Conversion  
Rate  (%) Classification  
0-20 Very Bad  
21-40 Bad  
41-60 Below Average  
61-80 Good  
81-100 Excellent  
Source  : (Darmawel, 2019)  
 
The calculation for obtaining the percentage 
of UAT result is shown in the equation below:  
 
 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒  (%)= 𝑓
𝑁 ×100%       ........................  (4) 
Description:  
P : Percentage   
f : Data  Frequency   
N: Number of Samples Processed  
 
𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒  (%)= 463
500×100%    
                                  = 92,6% 
 
Based on the results of percentage, it can be 
conclude from the number of user acceptance t est 
(UAT) which is 92,6%,  HEBULA  Application can be 
categorized as “Excellent”.  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
Based on the analysis of usability testing 
using UAT which consists display and functional , 
the results show that the HEBULA Application 
which is an interactive learning media for 
endan gered animals and plants in Indonesia for 
elementary school children using AR is very 
suitable for use to understanding learning about 
endangered animals and plants in Indonesia. This 
application can increase interest and make it easier 
for elementary scho ol children to learn about 
endangered animals and plants in Indonesia.  
 
REFERENCE  
 
Agustina, R., & Suprianto, D. (2018). Analisis Hasil 
Pemanfaatan Media Pembelajaran Interaktif 
Aljabar Logika Dengan User Acceptance Test 
(UAT). SMATIKA Jurnal , 8(2), 67 –73. 
Retrieved from 
http://jurnal.stiki.ac.id/SMATIKA/article/vie
w/205  
 
Darmawel, P. S. (2019). Augmented Reality 
Application For Introducing Endangered 
Indonesian Animals And Plants For 
Elementary School Children Using Android 
Based User Defined Target Markerless 
Tracking Method . Gunadarma University. | 6
85 
Devayana, I. K. D. D. (2 017). Pembelajaran 
Multimedia Interaktif Guru PJOK. Seminar 
Nasional Pendidikan Olahraga , 422 –429. 
Malang: Universitas Negeri Malang.  
 
Dewi, A. R., Isnanto, R. R., & Martono, K. T. (2015). 
Aplikasi Multimedia sebagai Media 
Pembelajaran Ilmu Pengetahuan Sosi al 
Materi Budaya di Indonesia menggunakan 
Unity Engine untuk Sekolah Dasar. Jurnal 
Teknologi Dan Sistem Komputer , 3(4), 471. 
https://doi.org/10.14710/jtsiskom.3.4.2015.
471 -480  
 
Dhiyatmika, I. D. G. W., Putra, I. K. D., & Mandenni, 
N. M. I. M. (2015). Aplika si Augmented Reality 
Magic Book Pengenalan Binatang untuk 
Siswa TK. Lontar Komputer , 6(2), 589 –596. 
Retrieved from 
https://ojs.unud.ac.id/index.php/lontar/artic
le/view/16708  
 
Feoh, G., & Cristyadi, P. M. F. (2018). ANALISA 
USABILITY TERHADAP PEMBELAJARAN DI  
SD TEGAL JAYA MENGGUNAKAN 
AUGMENTED REALITY BERBASIS ANDROID. 
Seminar Ilmiah Nasional Teknologi, Sains, Dan 
Sosial Humaniora (SINTESA) , (November), 
91–100. Bali: LPPM Universitas Dhyana Pura. 
Retrieved from 
https://jurnal.undhirabali.ac.id/index.php/si
ntesa/article/view/476  
 
Hamidi, N. (2018). Pengembangan Media 
Pembelajaran Interaktif Pendidikan Agama 
Islam Berbasis Adobe Flash Professional Cs6 
Untuk Mendukung Implementasi Kurikulum 
2013. Jurnal Pendidikan Agama Islam , 14(1), 
109 –130. 
https://doi.org/10.14 421/jpai.2017.141 -07 
 
Hidayat, T., & Setiyadi, D. (2017). Animasi Pop Up 
Pengenalan Hewan Beserta Klasifikasinya 
Kepada Anak Sekolah Dasar Menggunakan 
Teknologi Augmented Reality. Jurnal STMIK 
ISTB , 2(4), 65 –74. Retrieved from 
http://www.jurnalpradita.com/i ndex.php/jii
/article/view/38  
 
Irfansyah, J. (2017). Media Pembelajaran 
Pengenalan Hewan Untuk Siswa Sekolah 
Dasar Menggunakan Augmented Reality 
Berbasis Android. Journal Information 
Engineering and Educational Technology , 
1(1), 9 –17. Retrieved from 
https:// journal.unesa.ac.id/index.php/jieet/a
rticle/view/667  
 Kamiana, A., Made, W. A. K., & Gede, A. P. (2019). 
Pengembangan Augmented Reality Book 
Sebagai Media Pembelajaran Virus Berbasis 
Android. Kumpulan Artikel Mahasiswa 
Pendidikan Teknik Informatika (KARMAPA TI), 
8(2), 165 –171. Retrieved from 
https://ejournal.undiksha.ac.id/index.php/K
P/article/view/18351  
 
Kamphuis, C., Barsom, E., Schijven, M., & Christoph, 
N. (2014). Augmented reality in medical 
education? Perspectives on Medical Education , 
3(4), 300 –311. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40037 -013 -0107 -
7 
 
Kemdikbud. (2017). Selalu Berhemat Energi: Tema 
2 Buku Tematik Terpadu Kurikulum 2013 
(SD/MI Kelas IV) . Jakarta: Pusat Kurikulum 
dan Perbukuan, Balitbang, Kemendikbud.  
 
Lubis, A., Ritonga, A., Hia, Y., & Nasution, A. A . 
(2020). Online Learning Design at Higher 
Education: An Example from Mathematics 
Classroom. Journal of Physics: Conference 
Series , 1462 (1), 1 –7. Medan: Institute of 
Physics Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742 -
6596/1462/1/012004  
 
Sembiring, E. B., Wahy uni, D., & Anurogo, W. 
(2018). Multimedia Interaktif Pengenalan 
Hewan dan Tumbuhan Langka Menggunakan 
Model Tutorial. Journal of Digital Education, 
Communication, and Arts , 1(2), 103 –112. 
Retrieved from 
https://jurnal.polibatam.ac.id/index.php/DE
CA/article /view/839  
 
Suraya, K. R. (2014). Pembelajaran Tematik 
Integratif dan Pengaruhnya Terhadap Akhlak 
Siswa Kelas 4 SD Negeri Cebongan Sleman 
Yogyakarta Tahun Pelajaran 2013/2014 
(Universitas Islam Negeri Sunan Kalijaga 
Yogyakarta). Universitas Islam Negeri Suna n 
Kalijaga Yogyakarta. Retrieved from 
http://digilib.uin -suka.ac.id/13550/1/BAB 
I%2C IV%2C DAFTAR PUSTAKA.pdf  
 
Sutisna, H., & Hikmah, A. B. (2018). Pemanfaatan 
Teknologi Adobe Flash dan MDLC untuk 
Animasi Pengenalan Pakaian Tradisional 
Indonesia. Jurnal Tek nik Informatika , 6(1), 
21–30. Retrieved from http://jurnal.stmik -
dci.ac.id/index.php/jutekin/article/view/19
7 
 
Thomas, R., Linder, K. E., Harper, N., Blyth, W., & | 7
86 
 
Yee, V. (2019). Current and Future Uses of 
Augmented Reality in Higher Education. 
Retrieved fr om IDEA windows.net website: 
https://ideacontent.blob.core.windows.net/c
ontent/sites/2/2019/09/IDEA_Paper_81_1.p
df 
 
Wibowo, S. (2012). Media Pembelajaran 
Persamaan Kuadrat dan Fungsi Kuadrat Mata 
Pelajaran Matematika Kelas X. Techno.COM , 
11(1), 28 –36. Retri eved from 
http://publikasi.dinus.ac.id/index.php/techn
oc/article/view/937 | 8
